MLB players union rejects plan for salary cuts to restart season.
Position players including Altuve stayed in town amid shutdown
If there is a 2020 baseball season, the Astros will conduct their second spring training in Houston at Minute Maid Park, general manager James Click said Thursday.
ot i atl
Teams across MLB can choose between remaining in their home cities or traveling back to their spring training facilities in Florida or Arizona.
Like Minute Maid Park, the Astros’ facility in West Palm Beach, Fla., opened for individual workouts two weeks ago.
Several Astros position players stayed in Houston during the pandemic, including Jose Altuve, George Springer, Carlos Correa, Alex Bregman and Josh Reddick.
Pitchers Lance McCullers Jr. and Austin Pruitt are Houstonians, too.
“We explored several possibilities, but ultimately felt like that was, logistically, the best place to get our players ready to compete from day one as quickly as possible,” Click said.
Training at Minute Maid Park presumably would take away the possibility of spring training games, which the Astros could more easily facilitate in Florida, where several teams may return to ramp up before the regular season.
A solution could lie in Arlington.
Should the Rangers remain in Texas for a second spring training, it’s worth wondering whether the teams could meet for occasional scrimmages either at Minute Maid or the yet-to-be utilized Globe Life Field.
Click declined to speculate on that specific possibility Thursday.
“Playing spring training games is a big step when it comes to getting players ready for playing regularseason games,” Click said.
“T think if you ask any player, they will confirm that.
The decision about where to play spring training took that into account to a high degree.”
Though rosters will expand if the season starts, teams are expected to require at least three weeks of buildup before beginning the regular season.
Last month, Astros pitching coach Brent Strom said anything less than three weeks would give him serious pause.
Commissioner Rob Manfred has envisioned resuming the season in early to mid-July — perhaps as early as July 4.
That league owners and the players union have yet to reach an agreement on the season’s format has that timeline in serious peril.
While the two sides remain at a stalemate, Astros players continue to work out at Minute Maid Park and the facility in West Palm Beach.
Bregman and Reddick posted photographs
at Minute Maid Park on Tuesday, the same day Gov.
Greg Abbott authorized Texas to move into Phase 3 of economic reopening.
Phase 3 allows outdoor professional sporting events to operate at no more than 50 percent capacity.
Astros who have worked out at Minute Maid Park have adhered to strict restrictions including staggered workout times, mandatory personal protective equipment and individual drills only.
“We're going to continue to take direction from Major League Baseball and our team physicians and our athletic trainers,” Click said.
“We will work with them as well as the local authorities to determine what’s safe, but ultimately when it comes to further opening Minute Maid Park, that’s about what we think is best for our players, our staff and their families, and we will determine that with our medical professionals and Major League Baseball.”
