» Turner, Hidalgo seek to delay eviction proceedings.
Renters would have until Aug. 24 to vacate if the courts agree with mayor, county judge
Houston’s top officials are asking Harris County courts to suspend evictions filed during the coronavirus pandemic until Aug. 24.
Houston Mayor Sylvester Turner and Harris County Judge Lina Hidalgo sent a letter, first reported by Houston Public Media, to the 16 county Justices
of the Peace on Tuesday and asked them to use the guidelines for cases filed March 27 and onward.
Each judge will be able to decide individually what to do.
“Doing so is not only the right thing to do given the current crisis, but will contribute to our effort to protect public health,” Hidalgo and Turner wrote in the letter.
The Texas Supreme Court issued an emergency order suspending eviction procedures due to the coronavirus pandemic on March 19, although landlords were still able to file for evictions.
After one extension, the order expired on May 19.
However, as an analysis from the assistant county attorney notes, the order does not require local courts to restart evictions.
The proposed Aug. 24 resumption date lines up with the federal CARES Act, passed March 27.
The CARES Act stipulates that tenants living in certain federally backed properties cannot be served with an eviction notice until July 25.
Those eviction notices must be a 30-day notice to vacate, so tenants in housing protected by the CARES Act could not be removed from their homes until Aug. 24.
Harris County evictions have begun slowly.
Some courts began in June, others have yet to resume hearings and are working to find ways to teleconference.
Most of the cases heard are those that had been in the works before coronavirus, and that were halted because of the moratorium.
Housing advocates have warned that evictions filed because of the crashing economy during the coronavirus could leave an unprecedented number of people homeless or doubling up with family, and push them into debt.
The city of Houston put $15 million in federal funds to rental assistance.
The funds were spoken for within 90 minutes of the application coming online.
