Thornton Fractional appoints new leader
Jones-Redmond credited with reforming Illinois juvenile justice education
Daily Southtown « 11 Jun 2020 - 1: By Zak Koeske
Thornton Fractional High School District 215 has hired the woman who oversees education
at the state’s juvenile detention facilities as its new superintendent.
I y | al i
Sophia Jones-Redmond, superintendent of the Illinois Department of Juvenile Justice, was appointed late last month to lead the 3,400-student district, which serves Calumet City, Lansing, Burnham and Lynwood.
She will replace Teresa Lance, who accepted a position as the assistant superintendent for equity and innovation at Elgin-area School District U-46 earlier this year.
Jones-Redmond, who starts July 1, said Tuesday she was honored to serve as Thornton Fractional’s new leader and had been impressed by what she’d seen in the district so far.
“It is really a distinguished district and has a really excellent reputation of providing a plethora of educational opportunities,” she said.
“There are not many districts in the area that have such a high reputation.”
Jones-Redmond said it was difficult to leave her job at the Department of Juvenile Justice, where she’s worked since 2016, but is comforted knowing the myriad educational policy changes she helped implement would carry on.
While she’s worked in public education for the past 25 years, including in the south suburbs, Jones-Redmond actually started her career as an emergency medical technician and later jumped to public health during the time of the AIDS crisis.
“T have had three different distinct careers,” said Jones-Red
Wearing masks and sitting far apart from each other, riders are slowly trickling back onto public transit with the partial reopening of businesses in the city and state.
Passengers on the sparsely populated CTA and Metra trains say they find the interiors mostly clean, and the riders mostly masked.
It’s usually possible to keep at least 6 feet from other passengers, although buses tend to be more crowded, passengers and agency officials report.
“People are behaving — they’re wearing masks, they’re keeping their distance,” said United Airlines ground worker Jose Cruz, 49, of Logan Square, speaking through a blue
mask.
He has been commuting on the Blue Line to O’Hare International Airport throughout the pandemic.
But transportation experts say it could be months or even years before transit ridership returns to pre-pandemic levels, with some commuters choosing to drive or bike, while others continue to telecommute even after pandemic restrictions are lifted.
“This is going to be a slow, gradual process, I believe,” South Shore Line President and General Manager Michael Noland said.
Daily ridership on Metra tumbled about 97% below pre-coronavirus levels at the start of the pandemic, but it’s starting to slowly come back.
Ridership is currently 95% below where it was before the coronavirus, said Metra spokeswoman Meg Thomas-Reile.
Other transit agencies, including CTA and Pace, are also reporting a gradual uptick in passenger traffic.
On the South Shore Line, which travels between downtown and Northwest Indiana, ridership has inched up from about 5% of normal ridership at the start of the stay-at-home order to 10% now, Noland said.
The CTA has maintained full service during the pandemic, while Metra, the South Shore Line, and Pace are all running with reduced weekday service.
Several riders said that the CTA’s decision to maintain full service has meant that train cars are emptier, making social distancing easier to practice.
“T think it’s smart,” said Luis Mendez, 45, of Logan Square, of the CTA keeping full service.
Mendez also has been riding the train regularly, first to his janitor job at a hospital, and then on job searches after he got laid off.
He noted that while the trains are mostly empty, buses are often crowded.
He attributes this to CTA’s practice during the pandemic of reardoor boarding, which is allowing for free rides on most buses.
Most CTA buses do not have a Ventra reader at the rear door.
Some CTA riders, like Raymie Pyatt, 42, said they’ve seen an increase in homeless riders during the pandemic, a trend that also has been noticed by advocates for the homeless.
But Pyatt said this wouldn’t keep him from commuting to work by train.
Kathy Kramer, 48, of Mount Prospect, has continued to use Metra to commute to her hospital job in Chicago during the pandemic.
She said she has seen ridership on a single car grow over time from as little as two to ten during the afternoons.
“Metra has handled it well,” Kramer said.
“There’s enough trains available to allow you to spread out.” She said friends say they are anxious to get back on the train and return to normal commuting.
The CTA, Metra, Pace and South Shore Line have all promised riders that they are keeping trains and buses clean, with the CTA testing antimicrobial surface coating and considering using ultraviolet light to help disinfect equipment.
All four agencies have lost millions of dollars in fares and local sales tax revenue during the pandemic, and are getting help through the federal coronavirus relief package.
To help prevent crowding on buses, CTA officials during a board meeting Wednesday said the agency is building a new ridership information dashboard for its website to provide ridership information by hour and by bus route.
“This will help our customers determine when is the best time to ride,” said CTA chief innovation officer Molly Poppe.
