Judge: Aunt Martha’s home can stay Children’s quarantine center in Midlothian OK’d despite village’s concerns
Daily Southtown - 29 May 2020 - 1 - By Zak Koeske
A single-family home in Midlothian operated by a nonprofit health and wellness organization will be permitted to continue serving as a COVID-19 quarantine center for youths unU.S.
District Judge Thomas Durkin on Wednesday granted Aunt Martha’s Health and Wellness a 14-day temporary restraining order against the village of Midlothian, which had sought to prevent the facility from accepting children, arguing it violated local zoning rules.
“Today is an important day for everyone who cares about the health and well-being of the youth in our child welfare system, and it is just the latest chapter in Aunt Martha’s long history of standing up for and serving the most vulnerable members of our community,” Aunt Martha’s president and CEO Raul Garza said in a statement.
Midlothian officials did not immediately respond to a request for comment on the decision.
Aunt Martha’s, an Olympia
Fields-based federally qualified health center and licensed child welfare agency, last month converted a residential facility in Midlothian for homeless young adults into a COVID-19 quarantine center for youths under the care of the Department of Children and Family Services.
The home, which was not housing any sick youths as of Thursday, has served as a “last resort” for youths under DCFS’ care who have been exposed to or tested positive for COVID19 and
need a place to safely quarantine, Aunt Martha’s attorney Ricardo Meza told the judge.
The village argued in court filings and before the judge Wednesday that its resistance to the organization’s plan was due to safety concerns and said Aunt Martha’s would need to obtain a special use permit to convert the facility into a children’s quarantine center.
“This is not a case about the local government intentionally discriminating,” Michael Victor, an attorney for Midlothian, told the judge Wednesday.
“This is a case about the village taking its responsibilities very seriously, and the responsibilities at issue in this case is safety.”
In granting the temporary restraining order, Durkin said Aunt Martha’s had made acompelling argument its repurposed home complied with Midlothian’s zoning laws and that
while he appreciated the village’s safety concerns he didn’t feel the quarantine center posed a unique safety threat to the community.
The judge’s order limits to five the number of youths who can be quarantined at the home at one time and requires Aunt Martha’s to keep Midlothian in the loop about the individuals staying there.
The agency must provide the police chief an up-to-date list of the center’s residents with their age, COVID-19 status, acceptance date and expected discharge date, according to the order.
If any child on the list leaves the facility without permission or out of accordance with the provided schedule, Aunt Martha’s is required to immediately contact Midlothian police.
Aunt Martha’s, which since 2012 has used a home at 14401 S. Pulaski Road to provide transitional housing for homeless young adults, filed suit against Midlothian May 12 alleging the village had violated fair housing laws and requesting an injunction prohibiting the village from interfering with its conversion of the residence into a quarantine center.
The nonprofit began exploring the possibility of converting its Midlothian residence into a quarantine center in mid-March after discussing with DCFS its capacity to provide 24hour care for children in the agency’s custody who had been exposed to or who had contracted COVID-19, according to the suit.
By late March, Aunt Martha’s proposed to establish such a quarantine center and began preparing to make it a reality.
It relocated 11 young adults who had been living at the Midlothian home to hotels, and contacted the village about installing a negative pressure ventilation system to control the spread of airborne pathogens and dividing the home’s larger bedrooms into smaller ones to provide a safe environment for up to eight DCFS youths during the COVID-19 pandemic, according to the lawsuit.
Things seemed to be moving forward, Meza said, until an incident during the first weekend of April seemed to sour the village on the organization’s plans.
On April 2, a 19-year-old in DCFS’ care who had been hospitalized for behavioral and mental health issues tested positive for COVID-19 and was temporarily placed at Aunt Martha’s to quarantine, according to the suit.
While there, the teen had multiple interactions with Midlothian police after becoming physically aggressive and threatening to harm herself, including an incident in which she pulled off an officer’s mask and spit in his face, the suit states.
Midlothian’s police chief told Aunt Martha’s officials that multiple officers had to take time off work after being exposed to the sick teen, resulting in a 20% reduction in patrol, according to the suit.
“It was after that series of events when the mayor of Midlothian got involved, the (building) superintendent started asking about these schizophrenic kids, and then the Chief of Police said, you know, are you going to be bringing any more schizophrenic children,” Meza told the judge Wednesday.
Midlothian subsequently approved Aunt Martha’s permit application to install the negative pressure HVAC system, but denied its building permit and said the agency would need a special use permit to operate, according to the suit.
The village contends the quarantine facility is more akin to a medical facility and isn’t a permitted use in the zoning district where the home is located.
It also has argued that other facilities could be used to quarantine children under DCFS care who are either positive for the virus or symptomatic.
Aunt Martha’s, which disputes Midlothian’s interpretation of its zoning code, began accepting DCFS youths at the quarantine center April 24, after passing a state fire marshal inspection and receiving a license to operate from DCES, according to the suit.
While there are not currently any youth residing at the center, the facility has housed seven teenagers ages 13 to 19 since April, Meza said Thursday.
Their stays have ranged from a single day to 15 days, he said, and no more than three individuals have quarantined at the center simultaneously.
Meza said Aunt Martha’s would continue to operate the center for as long as DCFS needs and would work with the court to ensure it remains a viable resource for youth who need a place to quarantine during the pandemic.
“We hope that the Village of Midlothian will recognize that the home is a necessary resource and will not attempt to take further action against us at the conclusion of the 14day period,” he said.
Both parties will reconvene for a status hearing on June 9 to discuss how they wish to proceed and whether the temporary restraining order should be extended.
