Homer Glen restaurants can expand outdoor dining
Daily Southtown - 29 May 2020 - 1 - By Michelle Mullins Michelle Mullins is a freelancer.
The village of Homer Glen will allow restaurants to open existing outdoor patios and expand into parking lots as part of an effort to help the businesses prepare for outdoor dining under new state guidelines that begin Friday.
The expanded patios will have to maintain adequate parking for patrons and not negatively impact neighboring businesses, village officials said at Wednesday’s Village Board meeting.
The Building Department will help restaurants develop site plans, Mayor George Yukich said.
The village will offer a free temporary outdoor dining permit for expansion of the dining areas.
Outdoor dining will be available until 10 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and until midnight on Friday and Saturday.
The village and the Homer Township Highway Department will deliver free barricades to restaurants that need them to separte diners from traffic.
The barricades will be on loan until the state order is lifted, according to the village.
Masks will be required by customers to enter the restaurant to use the bathroom and receive take-out orders.
The village is also considering a moratorium on enforcing its temporary sign ordinances to allow for businesses to advertise they are open after the stay-at-home order is lifted.
Village staff is working out guidelines for businesses to use promotional signs, and the board will consider them next month.
New trustee
The Village Board also appointed Plan Commission Chairman Broque Backal as a village trustee, replacing Ann Holtz, who recently resigned citing a different vision from the rest of the board.
Backal will serve until the April 2021 election.
Backal, who is married with two sons, is a 25-year resident of Homer Glen.
He has served on the Plan Commission since 2015 and has been its chair since October.
Yukich said that Backal is knowledgeable about several village projects, allowing him to assimilate quickly.
The Village Board also approved the appointment of Plan Commission Vice Chair Bryan Kozor to serve as the new chairman.
