Working for justice is a response to destruction One way to make sense of looting is to acknowledge systemic racism
Daily Southtown - 3 Jun 2020 - 1 - TED SLOWIK
Shattered pieces of glass littered a sidewalk Monday afternoon in front of a Family Dollar store along Western Avenue near 119th Street in Chicago’s Mount Greenwood neighborhood.
A cardboard display with bags of chips was overturned in the entryway as I stepped closer to take a picture.
“Watch out for the blood,” a Chicago police officer said behind me.
I looked down and noticed red drops on the concrete amid the many small pieces of glass.
Moments earlier, I had photographed and listened to people demonstrating at 127th Street and Western Avenue in Blue Island.
I had asked if there was any visible damage from disturbances nearby.
They had directed me here, on the southern edge of Chicago, and to 119th Street and Marshfield Avenue, in Calumet Park, where several stores looked like they had been looted.
One did not have to travel far in the south suburbs to find evidence of property damage and other fallout related to recent incidents involving police officers and black citizens.
People seemed to agree that a Minneapolis police officer was wrong to kneel for nearly nine minutes on the neck of George Floyd, who later died.
There seemed to be consensus that the deaths of Breonna Taylor in Kentucky and Ahmaud Arbery in Georgia were tragic events that demanded justice and accountability.
People seemed equally willing to condemn looting and other violence that has marred big cities and smaller communities across the nation for several consecutive nights.
Aside from those points, however, there seems to be little agreement.
Some disagree with the actions of peaceful demonstrators who believe it is important to share the message that black lives matter.
Others disagree with almost all forms of protest about racial injustice, including athletes kneeling during the national anthem.
Some share the view of recent Presidential Medal of
Freedom recipient Rush Limbaugh, who said Monday he doesn’t think white people experience preferential treatment in America.
“T don’t buy into white privilege,” Limbaugh said during his nationally syndicated radio show.
If one wants to try to make sense of the looting and burning of buildings and other civil unrest, one might start by acknowledging the existence of systemic racism in America.
One could begin by recognizing racial inequity in criminal justice, housing, health care, education, employment, transportation and other systems.
“In the south suburbs, the disparities in the housing market are black and white,” said John Petruszak, executive director of the Homewood-based South Suburban Housing Center.
“T think we’re seeing pent-up frustration over economic disparity,” Petruszak said.
The recent civil unrest has unnerved many residents of
predominantly white communities in the south and southwest suburbs.
Many towns have enacted curfews.
Incidents that seemed confined to downtown Chicago a few days ago have spread into the suburbs like shock waves from an explosion.
“My heart is aching right now and the emotions I feel (are) overwhelming,” 17th District state Sen. Elgie Sims, D-Chicago, wrote Monday evening on a social media page.
“TI spend countless hours demanding equality for all communities, fighting for economic opportunities and fighting to bring resources back to my community,” Sims wrote.
“To see the destruction across a community I love so dearly is heartbreaking, but the unbreakable spirit exemplified by so many in the community is warming my heart beyond measure.” Sims represents a region that remains largely segregated despite court rulings and decades of policies designed to promote equality.
Many white people in the Southland experience opportunities that are simply unavailable to many black people.
Acentury after our nation fought a civil war over slavery, riots swept the country in the wake of the 1968 assassination of the Rev.
Dr. Martin Luther
King Jr. Worldwide turmoil prompted Pope Paul VI to publish a historic message on Dec. 8, 1971.
“If you want peace, work for justice,” the pope famously wrote.
I interpret the pope’s words to mean that communities should work to address systemic racism, rather than ignore it or deny its existence.
Some elected officials in Cook County have campaigned on platforms pledging to address inequities in property assessments, education funding, criminal justice or other areas.
Some in the private sector, like the South Suburban Housing Center, work to address inequity by rebuilding neighborhoods one residence at a time.
“We're bridge builders,” Petruszak said.
He meant his organization works in a progressive manner to establish networks and foster relationships that help determine how to best use grant funds and other resources when they become available.
Our communal failure to address systemic racism could be likened to our nation’s neglect of its highway infrastructure.
We can put off addressing racism for days, weeks, months or years, just as we have ignored the need to replace crumbling roads and bridges.
But if you ignore the existence of a problem for too long, eventually the need to do something
catches up with you.
At the very least, problems typically become more expensive and difficult to fix the longer you put them off.
Some believe the path to change should begin with a focus on police accountability.
Others believe the situation calls for a heavyhanded response by authorities to restore order and to punish instigators of violence who disrespect the rule of law.
Opportunists are everywhere.
Some are thieves stealing merchandise from stores.
Others are politicians using the moment to stoke partisan divides.
Then there are those who acknowledge our society’s failures to address racial inequity and want to help.
They dedicate themselves to showing others how to overcome fear and ignorance.
They adhere to the “golden rule” common among all faiths, which is to treat others as you would like to be treated.
They’re less concerned with power and money.
They care more about whether their neighbors have food, clothing and shelter.
They’re heartbroken by the senseless destruction of their communities.
But they commit themselves to doing what they can to improve systems that treat people unfairly.
“If you want peace, work for justice.”
