“Can't keep quiet anymore'
Tulsa World - 9 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Tim Stanley
Agroup of ministers and others from Tulsa's various faith communities marched on City Hall on Monday to pray for justice and racial healing while continuing a call for police reform.
The Unity Over Violence Prayer March began Monday morning at the Greenwood Cultural Center with several speakers addressing the crowd before more than 300 marchers walked the mile-long route to converge on City Hall.
The Rev.
C.J.
Neal, march organizer, said Greenwood was chosen as the starting point because it was the site almost 100 years ago of the Tulsa Race Massacre.
“The ground you are standing on is
House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, drawing on the nation's history of slavery.
Before unveiling the package, House and Senate Democrats held a moment of silence at the Capitol's Emancipation Hall, reading the names of George Floyd and many others killed during police interactions.
They knelt for 8 minutes and 46 seconds — nowa symbol of police brutality and violence — the length of time prosecutors say Floyd was pinned under a white police officer's knee before he died.
Trump, who met with law enforcement officials at the White House, characterized Democrats as having “gone
As activists beyond Capitol Hill call to restructure police departments and even to “defund the police,” the president tweeted, “LAW & ORDER, NOT DEFUND AND ABOLISH THE POLICE.” He declared later, “We won't be dismantling our police.”
Democratic leaders pushed back, saying their proposal would not eliminate police departments — a decision for cities and states — but establish new standards and oversight.
Joe Biden, the presumed Democratic presidential nominee, “does not believe that police should be defunded,” said spokesman Andrew Bates.
The Justice in Policing Act, the most ambitious law enforcement reform from Congress in years, confronts several aspects of policing that have come under strong criticism, especially as more and more police violence is captured on cellphone video and shared widely across the nation and the world.
The package would limit legal protections for police, create a national database of excessive-force incidents and ban police choke holds, among other changes.
It would revise the federal criminal police misconduct statute to make it easier to prosecute officers who are involved in “reckless” misconduct and it would change “qualified immunity” protections to more broadly enable damage claims against police in lawsuits.
The legislation would ban racial profiling, boost requirements for police body cameras and limit the transfer of military equipment to local jurisdictions.
Overall, the bill seeks to provide greater transparency of police behavior in several ways.
For one, it would grant subpoena power to the Justice Department to conduct “pattern and practice” investigations of potential misconduct and help states conduct independent investigations.
And it would create a “National Police Misconduct Registry,” a database to try to prevent officers from transferring from one department to another with past misconduct undetected, the draft says.
