Officers in Floyd case are charged
Prosecutors file tougher charge against key officer, charge three others
Tulsa World + 4 Jun 2020 - A1 + By Amy Forliti and Tim Sullivan
MINNEAPOLIS — Prosecutors filed a tougher charge Wednesday against the police officer at the center of the George Floyd case and charged three other officers, delivering a victory to protesters galvanized by a death that roused racial tensions and unleashed coast-tocoast unrest.
The most serious charge was filed against Derek Chauvin, who was caught on video pressing his knee to Floyd's neck and now must defend himself against an accusation of second-degree murder.
The three other officers at the scene — Thomas Lane, J. Kueng and Tou Thao — were charged for
“We really want to stress that.
Because when you wear a mask, you're doing that to protect those around you, because we know that some people have asymptomatic presentation of the virus.”
Frequent hand-washing obviously can be difficult at an outside gathering, she said, “so we would encourage people to utilize hand sanitizer containing at least 60% alcohol and avoid touching your face.”
Anyone who believes they've been exposed to COVID-19, should contact their health care provider or call THD, Stephens said.
“If you know that you've been in close contact with a confirmed positive individual for a prolonged period — within six feet for 10 minutes or more — you should remain home for 14, days and monitor yourself for symptoms.”
If testing is advised, it can be done by appointment every weekday at THD, with the results back within a few days.
“Call us and get an appointment to be tested,” she said, adding that drive-through service is offered.
Also, this Friday, THD will offer free testing without an appointment as part of the Unity and the Community event in north Tulsa, Stephens said.
The testing will be offered from 4-7 p.m. at a tent set up at Greater Union Baptist Church.
“Anyone can just walk up, drive up, bike up — it's first-come, first-serve,” she said.
Even if you're not attending large gatherings, it's still not time to let your guard down, Stephens said.
“T would stress that coronavirus is still circulating and spreading in our community,” she said.
“And everyone should be taking those steps to protect themselves.
“Frequent hand washing, not touching your face, wearing a mask, limiting trips outside your home.
Those are all important steps that we can take to keep everyone safe.”
