NCAA hits OSU with ban
Men's basketball program gets probation, postseason ban, loses scholarships
Tulsa World - 6 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Frank Bonner Il
The NCAA hit the Oklahoma State men's basketball program with a three-year probation and a postseason ban in 2020-21 following an FBI investigation into college basketball.
The program was also hit with a reduction of three
total scholarships from 2020-21 through 2022-23.
As a result of the FBI'S twoyear investigation into college basketball, Oklahoma State received a notice of allegations from the NCAA for a potential Level I violation last November.
A now former staff member — associate head coach and recruiting coordinator Lamont Evans — was accused of knowingly soliciting and receiving benefits to arrange meetings between players and financial advisers between April 2016 and September 2017, according to the notice from the NCAA that was voluntarily disclosed by the university last year.
Oklahoma State athletic director Mike Holder and head coach Mike Boynton expressed their frustrations about the penalties during a video conference Friday.
“I find it almost impossible to reconcile the severe penalties imposed by the NCAA for the violations that were detailed in today's report,” Holder said.
“The NCAA agreed that Lamont Evans acted alone and for his own benefit.
The NCAA also agreed that OSU did not benefit in recruiting, commit a recruiting violation, did not play an ineligible player and did not display a lack of institutional control.”
Holder went on to say that the NCAA agreed OSU cooperated throughout the entire process.
OSU did the right thing, Holder said.
He stated Evans acted selfishly for personal gain without regard to the student-athletes or the university
“Given this context, how does the NCAA justify a postseason ban and the loss of three scholarships for violations that damaged the university and basketball program?” Holder said.
“Penalties that are normally reserved for those seeking a substantial or extensive recruiting or competitive advantage.
I'm shocked by the ruling today and determined to vigorously fight against this injustice.”
Evans, who was originally hired by former head coach Brad Underwood and retained by current coach Mike Boynton, was fired in 2017 after federal charges were announced, stemming from an undercover sting that involved three other college basketball assistant coaches.
Evans ultimately was sentenced to three months in prison for bribery.
The NCAA ruling released Friday said Evans received at least $18,150 in bribes from financial advisers to influence studentathletes.
The November notice named Marty Blazer and Munish Sood as the two advisors who offered Evans money in exchange for setting up meetings with at least two players, including one from a previous coaching stop (South Carolina) in an attempt to influence the players to retain their services.
One of those players received $300 from Evans, had to go through the reinstatement process to become eligible after the payment and then had to hire an attorney to be questioned by the FBI.
Although Boynton was never mentioned in any of the allegations that occurred, he and his players are left to deal with the consequences.
Boynton said he made a point to call every returning and incoming player to break the news to them personally before they heard it elsewhere.
“T sit here extremely frustrated and really disappointed for this program but most importantly for the players in our program, “Boynton said.
“Many of which weren't a part of our program when this began and has absolutely very minimal knowledge of anything that even happened in this case.
I feel bad for them and I certainly hope that through the appeals process we can understand more how terribly impactful this can be for their careers and their futures.”
Oklahoma State said in a statement Friday it will file an immediate appeal.
June 20 is the deadline to file an appeal.
The Infractions Appeal Committee will hear the appeal as the final step in the NCAA infractions process.
OSU did not dispute the NCAA'S findings, but Holder said the hearing that happened in February was to express how OSU didn't believe Evans' actions should be a Level I violation for the program.
Level I violations can be punished by postseason bans, scholarship reductions and show-cause orders against those involved.
“A Level I for Lamont Evans, yeah absolutely,” Holder said.
“But not Level I for Oklahoma State University.
We were a victim.
So we felt like it was more Level 2.”
Aggravation, standard and mitigation are the three tiers of Level I violation.
Aggravation has a two to four-year postseason ban, standard has a one- to two-year ban and mitigation is zero to a one-year ban.
OSU received a standard Level I penalty.
“T don't think that what happened at our school deserves standard classification,” Holder said.
“I think it's more mitigation.”
Boynton agreed a postseason ban was too harsh a penalty.
“In any given time in the last three years, my name has never come up in any of this stuff,” Boynton said.
“So I was thoroughly disappointed in the way the NCAA decided to hand out penalties that will certainly impact people's lives who had absolutely nothing to do with this case.
Maybe probation I could see.
Maybe some reduction in recruiting activities.
Even though there were no recruiting violations here, I could probably get around justifying that in my mind.
But in terms of a postseason ban for a group of kids who were probably 15 and 16 years old when this stuff was going on is completely, completely out of balance.”
