Tribal gaming compacts get federal OK
New compacts would allow sports betting, casinos outside tribal jurisdictions
Gov.
Kevin Stitt's gaming compacts with the Comanche Nation and Otoe-Missouria Tribe were granted f ederal approval Monday, prompting a strong rebuke from Oklahoma Attorney General Mike Hunter.
“The Department of t he Interior' s thought less and irresponsible inaction on the comp acts doesn' t change our conclusion that the governor lacks the authority to enter into compacts that include activities not legal in Oklahoma,” Hunter said, referring to sports betting and certain other forms of gambling he says are currently illegal under state law.
“The tribes cannot begin operating under the terms of these compacts until the many questions that remain pending before the Oklahoma Supreme Court are resolved.
Iam deeply disappointed in Interior Secretary( David) Bernhardt' s abdication of his responsibility to all of Oklahoma's Native American sovereigns, not just two.”
By“federal in action ,” Hunter was referring to the Interior Department's decision to let the compacts take effect by failing to take specific action to approve or reject them within 45 days.
When no action is taken, compacts are “deemed approved.” They then take effect when they are published in the Federal Register, which must occur sometime within the following 45 days.
Stitt and representatives of the two tribes issued statements Monday praising the federal agency's decision.
“With these new gaming compacts, Oklahoma is ushering in a new era of prosperity, opportunity, and partnership for the state and the tribes,” Stitt said.
The Comanche Nation and Otoe-Missouria Tribe issued a joint statement that said the Interior Department's decision means the compacts are “legal” and the tribes can begin operating under the terms agreed to between the parties once the compacts are published in the Federal Register.
“This compact represents the best of the Comanche people — being a good neighbor, reciprocating back to our people and the communities in which we live; honoring the past while looking ahead to a brighter future for all,” said Comanche Nation Chairman William Nelson Sr. “We have known since we reached this agreement with the governor of Oklahoma that our compact is legal and are pleased that the U.S. Department of the Interior has agreed.”
“Today's approval of our compact with the state of Oklahoma will allow us to welcome in a new, modern era of tribal gaming to the benefit of both our people and the state of Oklahoma,” said OtoeMissouria Tribe Chairman John R. Shotton.
“This compact will help us further diversify our economy, bring in new revenue for services for our people and will allow us to double down on our community engagement in both our existing rural communities and future expansion opportunities.
This compact is
what is best for our tribal members and we appreciate the Department of the Interior for approving the compact today.”
The two tribal leaders' enthusiasm for the approval of the compacts was not shared by John L. Berrey, chairman of the Quapaw Nation.
Berrey called the approval a“gut punch to tribes in Oklahoma and across t he country.” “Today represents a new low-water mark for Indian gaming, and another page in the long history of the federal government's disservice toward Indian people,” Berrey said .““Because Secretary Bernhardt failed to do his job, Gov.
Stitt and other governors will now be emboldened to make illegal demands of tribes when negotiating new gaming compacts.
The result in Oklahoma will be more litigation — and more damage to the relationship between tribal governments and the state.”
The new compacts contain controversial provisions that would authorize the tribes to conduct sports betting and authorize each tribe to build three casinos in counties outside their traditional jurisdictions, if all other legal hurdles are eventually cleared.
“Now that the compacts are approved, we will evaluate our options moving forward on sports betting,” Shotton said.
Hunter issued a legal opini on earlier that concluded Stitt exceeded his authority by authorizing sports betting, which he said is not legal under Oklahoma law.
The governor's attorneys have argued the governor does have legal authority to approve compacts that authorize sports betting, but have asked a federal judge to rule on the limits of his authority.
Oklahoma legislative leaders have asked the Oklahoma Supreme Court to step in and decide that issue, instead.
Neither the federal judge nor the Oklahoma Supreme Court have yet had time to render a decision.
The Interior Department sent out a briefing statement Monday that said when compacts are deemed approved, they are approved only to the extent that they comply with the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act, which leaves room for other issues to be fought in court.
“It's safe to say federal inaction won't settle these roiled waters,” said Stephen Greetham, senior counsel for the Chickasaw Nation, which is one of the tribes that has challenged the legality of the compacts.
Opinions differ greatly on what Monday's Department of Interior decision will mean for tribal gaming in Oklahoma.
“This decision will have national ramifications as it reinforces tribal sovereignty and moves Oklahoma away from a one-size-fits-all gaming compact, said Rob Rosette, attorney for the Comanche Nation and Otoe-Missouria Tribe.
“The Department of the Interior rightly chose to uphold and respect the sovereignty of these two tribes, and we are confident the department will do the same for others going forward.”
However, Matthew L. Morgan, chairman of t he Oklahoma Indian Gaming Association, said approval of the compacts will “introduce the type of potential instability that existing compacts were designed to avoid and exacerbate the relationship between tribal governments and Gov.
Stitt.”
“The Oklahoma Indian Gaming Association continues to be concerned with the legal and political ramifications if these agreements go into effect,” Morgan said.
“Our concerns align with those of Senate and House leadership and Attorney General Mike Hunter' s legal opinion, stating that Gov.
St itt does not have the authority to enter into and bind the state to compacts with Indian tribes that authorize gaming activity prohibited by Oklahoma law.
“While we respect the sovereignty of each Tribe to take what actions it believes it must on behalf of its citizens, these agreements do not advance the tribal governmental gaming industry in Oklahoma.”
