Private school commencement comes under fire
NORMAN — A recent private school graduation ceremony attended by hundreds who sat shoulder to shoulder despite direction from the city to practice social distancing amid the COVID-19 pandemic drew national media attention and was mocked on social media by some in the community.
Community Christian School administrators defended their decision to host the ceremony on May 16, with one telling a local TV station “churches are allowed to be open and we definitely shared the Gospel.”
About 600 people attended the commencement in the school's activity center, the station reported.
The city, meanwhile, criticized the school for failing to follow regulations contained in Norman's Healthier at Home Initiative, spokeswoman Annahlyse Meyer told The Oklahoman on Friday.
“CCS was directed to follow all social distancing requirements for church services, which opened on May 15, as outlined by the state guidelines,” Meyer said.
“We were disappointed to learn through social media after the graduation took place that they did not adhere to any of these social distancing requirements.
“The city will continue to monitor our COVID-19 numbers and respond to businesses on a complaint basis.”
Commencement photos published by the Norman Transcript show CCS graduates and supporters mostly seated next to each other, with few in the crowd wearing face masks.
The pictures generated a flurry of activity on the publication's Facebook page.
The reaction was mixed, with several people congratulating students and praising them for their determination.
“Way to go CCS!
So proud
they didn't cower to the fear mongering!” one person wrote.
“If people don't want to get out, don't!
But it's time to get back out again and not live in fear!!
!”
“Coronavirus Commencement Spreaders!
2020 Yay!” another post read.
“Darwinism at work in our community,” stated another contributor.
One person who posted didn't see the problem.
“Are we going to start socially shaming drivers soon?” he wrote.
“For the vast majority of people getting behind the wheel is much more risky than covid.”
Matt Cox, the school's assistant administrator, described the ceremony as a “church service type event.”
“Churches are allowed to be open and we definitely shared the Gospel,” he told KFOR.
Attempts to reach Cox or Community Christian School Principal Barbara Ohsfeldt for this story were unsuccessful.
According to news reports, those in attendance had their temperatures taken at the door and were allowed to sit where they felt comfortable.
“People wore masks but not everybody was required to wear masks, obviously, but people did wear masks,” Cox told the TV station.
Norman's Healthier at Home plan is currently in Phase 1B, according to the city's website.
The plan advises residents to limit gatherings to 10 people or fewer, stay at home if over the age of 65, wear face coverings while outside the home and maintain physical distancing.
The number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in Oklahoma grew by 111 on Saturday to total 5,960, the Oklahoma State Department of Health reported Saturday.
The number of deaths increased by four to a total of 311, the Health Department said.
