Record cases, deaths Dallas County surpasses two singleday highs with 257 new cases, 16 deaths
The Dallas Morning News - 3 Jun 2020 - 1A - By NIC GARCIA and DANA BRANHAM
Dallas County reported 257 new coronavirus cases and 16 deaths Tuesday, a record high for both figures.
Dallas County reported 257 new coronavirus cases and 16 deaths Tuesday, a record for both categories.
The previous high for new cases was 253 and deaths was 14.
Thirteen of the 16 most recent deaths were Dallas residents: a man in his 40s, two men in their 50s, four men and one woman in their 60s (including one man who lived at a longterm care facility), a man and a woman in their 70s, two women in their 80s and a man in his 100s.
The others include a Duncanville woman in her 70s, a man in his 80s who lived in a Lancaster longterm care facility and a man in his 90s who lived in a Mesquite longterm care facility.
The county has now had a total of 10,719 cases, including 245 deaths.
More than a third of the county’s deaths have been tied to longterm care facilities.
Of Dallas County coronavirus patients who have required hospitalization, twothirds have been under 65 and about half have a highrisk chronic health condition.
While Dallas County is still reporting new cases and deaths, it has recently begun focusing on hospital admissions and bed capacity.
Those
numbers remain flat, said Dr. Philip Huang, director of Dallas County Health and Human Services.
Because there has not been a 14day decrease in any data the county tracks, health officials are urging residents to stay home as much as possible.
Huang told county commissioners at their meeting Tuesday that monitoring multiple data points is becoming more important because of a confluence of events, including ongoing protests through the Dallasfort Worth area that have drawn huge crowds.
“There is still a lot of protective behaviors going on, but there is a lot of opening up,” he said.
“We’re concerned about Memorial Day activities and the crowds and gatherings over the last weekend.”
Huang and other health officials addressing the court stressed the continued use of masks and other facial coverings as a key strategy to drive down transmission of the coronavirus.
“If we can get everybody to wear a mask in public, it’s my strong belief this thing would disappear before long,” said Dr. Robert Haley, an epidemiologist and professor at UT Southwestern Medical Center.
“I fear if we have a bunch of people not participating in masking, the economy will be sluggish for a long time.”
Contact tracing
County commissioners approved using $10 million in federal funding Tuesday to dramatically increase the health department’s contact tracing efforts.
The money will be used to hire about 200 workers to interview people who have tested positive and alert anyone who may have come in contact with them.
Since the coronavirus first appeared in Dallas, the department has relied on volunteers — mostly college students — to help with tracing.
Using money Congress gave the county as part of its COVID19 aid package will provide a “potent weapon” in the county’s fight against the virus, Haley said.
Also on Tuesday, Dallas County Judge Clay Jenkins announced the federal government could soon supply the county with 1,000 more COVID19 tests a day through the rest of the month.
The tests must be used at mobile testing sites, Jenkins said.
If the federal government approves the county’s plan, some of the tests would be used by UT Southwestern to better understand the prevalence of the virus in the county.
“Hopefully if we do this right, we can do it in July, too,” Jenkins said.
Tarrant County
Tarrant County reported 89 new cases Tuesday, for a total of 5,623.
The county also has reported 167 COVID19 deaths, including two that were newly reported Tuesday.
Of its total number of cases, 2,374 people are reported to have recovered.
Collin County
The Department of State Health Services took over COVID19 case investigation and contact tracing for Collin County on Monday.
State data shows that Collin County has had 1,312 cases and 34 deaths as of Tuesday — the same numbers the state reported Monday and the county reported Sunday.
Denton County
Denton County announced 18 new cases, bringing its total to 1,416.
Five more people have recovered from the virus as well, according to a Denton County Public Health news release.
The county will provide a free drivethrough testing center from 8 a.m. to noon Friday at the Sanger Sports Park.
People who have symptoms of COVID19 or had symptoms within the last week or are essential employees are eligible, but they must preregister by calling 9403492585.
Rockwall County
Rockwall County reported four new cases Tuesday, including one resident of the Broadmoor Medical Lodge, a longterm care facility in Rockwall.
The other new cases included another Rockwall resident and two Royse City residents.
One person was under the age of 20, two were in their 30s, and one was in their 80s.
Kaufman County
Kaufman County reported 14 new cases Tuesday, bringing its total to 230.
One resident has died of the virus, and the county has reported 214 recoveries.
Ellis County
As of Ellis County’s most recent update Sunday, it has reported 343 cases, including 290 recoveries and 14 deaths.
Johnson County
As of Johnson County’s latest update Monday, it has reported a total of 199 cases.
Four people have died of the virus, and 149 people have been released from isolation.
