$5 classic fiilms planned for Cinemark reopening Chain will offer $5 classic movie tickets starting June 19
Planobased Cinemark says it will start a fourphase reopening June 19, beginning with classic films for $5.
Cinemark knows it needs to roll out the red carpet to lure moviegoers back to its theaters, where sitting for a twohour movie in a seat that was occupied by multiple strangers no longer seems normal.
The Planobased chain said Wednesday that it will start a fourphase reopening June 19, beginning with five theaters in the Dallasfort Worth area.
Cinemark will begin by showing classic films for $5 and then transition to studio releases with regular pricing in July.
This is a few weeks earlier than its previous plan to reopen in July.
Texas Gov.
Greg Abbott said theaters could reopen May 1 with the suggested precaution of seating moviegoers 6 feet apart — or about two empty seats — but Cinemark and other chains decided to wait.
Cinemark CEO Mark Zoradi said he expects most states to allow 50% capacity by July, and the company, which has focused on cost cutting during the CO
VID19 pandemic, can be profitable at that level and far below it.
He hopes the welcomeback promotion will get people comfortable with coming back to the nation’s thirdlargest theater operator.
The movie theater industry shut down when stayathome orders went into effect in midmarch to control the spread of the coronavirus.
Cinemark closed its U.S. theaters March 17 and its Latin America locations the next day.
The closing of all theaters “had a significant impact on our firstquarter results, and continues to impact us today,” Zoradi said in releasing the company’s financial results Wednesday.
Cinemark lost $59.6 million in the threemonth period that ended March 31, down from a profit of $32.7 million in the same period last year.
Admissions revenue fell 25% to $232.3 million.
It operates 555 theaters in 41 states and 15 countries in South and Central America.
Zoradi told analysts Cinemark is in a good position to take advantage of the pentup demand to leave the house.
He previously spent 30 years at Walt Disney Co., including a stint as president of the Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures Group.
Cinemark’s most obvious luring tactic is its new prices.
Starting June 19, Cinemark will show classic films, hoping nostalgia attracts those hesitant to be the first to test new safety measures.
Ticket prices will also be reminiscent of the old times, at $5 for adults and $3 for children and seniors.
Even concessions will have welcomeback pricing.
Reopening plan
The reopening will be in oneweek stages.
The first week is a fivetheater test around North Texas.
Cinemark did not identify those theaters.
In the second week, the chain will open onethird of its domestic theaters with a focus on larger theaters in larger markets.
Then another third of theaters will open in the third and fourth weeks, for a 100% reopening by July 10.
The experience once focused on an intimate setting to share in the thrills of cinema will feel different.
New technology for online ticket buying will ensure moviegoers choose a seat that is socially distanced from others.
Plexiglass will separate employees from customers.
Masks are required for employees, encouraged for guests.
To increase social distancing, show times will be staggered.
The theater will also clean seats every morning and before each showing.
Cinemark said it’s been focused on making the business leaner and more efficient so it can turn a profit at reduced capacity.
For example, online ticket buyers used to have to pick up a printed ticket at the theater.
Now their online tickets can be scanned for entry, similar to airline boarding passes.
Other costcutting strategies include optimizing hours and occupancy levels, as well as a temporary suspension of its dividend payment to shareholders.
The biggest costcutter was the layoff of 17,500 hourly workers in April.
When Cinemark reopens, it will only offer concessions that are the least labor intensive to increase margins.
Cinemark said it will scale its rehiring of employees to consumer demand.
Zoradi and the board of directors gave up their salaries while other executives agreed to 80% pay cuts.
Strong balance sheet
The company is in a better position than its peers to survive the COVID19 impact due to its strong balance sheet, according to Bloomberg Intelligence reports on the company.
Cinemark had $479.4 million in cash on March 31 and ended May with $640 million in cash.
Cinemark’s two biggest competitors — AMC Theatres and Regal Entertainment — don’t have as strong balance sheets.
AMC said Wednesday that it has doubts about staying in business.
The top chain, which operates 996 theaters in 15 countries, expects to report a loss of $2.1 billion to $2.4 billion for the first quarter.
The company said it had $718.3 million in cash as of April and can use that to reopen theaters this summer or later.
However, beyond that, it may need additional liquidity.
AMC asked bondholders to accept cuts of about 50% on existing debt.
One revenue stream Cinemark is missing out on is streaming, with no platform like AMC’S Theatre on Demand.
However, Cinemark’s loyalty program — Movieclub — remains strong at February levels of more than 950,000 members, thanks to its proactive pausing of memberships after its theaters closed.
Cinemark has tried to entice streaminginclined viewers by updating its amenities to get Netflix users out of their homes.
This includes luxury lounger recliner seats, concessions that go beyond popcorn and larger screens.
Cinemark’s XD Extreme Digital Cinema offers walltowall and ceilingtofloor screens with wraparound sound and improved image quality.
Some locations also offer IMAX, motion seats and virtual reality options.
Summer shows
It’s also betting a delayed lineup of traditional summer blockbusters will attract audiences.
The first movie to return to theaters will be the Russell Crowe thriller Unhinged on July 1.
However, Cinemark’s first major release will be Christpher Nolan’s Tenet from Warner Bros. on July 17.
While Zoradi said he can’t promise the planned July 17 release date will happen, he said Nolan and Warner Bros. are pushing for it.
Other big openings this year include the July 24 release of Disney’s liveaction remake of Mulan, followed by A Quiet Place Part II, the third installment of the Spongebob SquarePants film franchise, Wonder Woman 1984, Marvel Studios’ Black Widow, the 25th James Bond film No Time to Die and the Steven Spielbergdirected musical West Side Story.
And next year’s lineup is already strong with the highly anticipated release of Avatar 2, which has resumed production in New Zealand, as well as The Batman from Warner Bros., Spiderman 3, Jurassic World: Dominion, the fourth installment of The Matrix, the seventh installment of Mission Impossible and the ninth installment of Fast and Furious.
Zoradi said he sees a strong recovery for Cinemark in 2021 and into 2022.
While the virus has had a dramatic impact on the industry, he said moviegoing is a beloved pastime and escape from reality that spans generations and won’t be ended by a temporary shutdown.
