Stocks surge on hopes for recovery Investors optimistic economy will pull out of virusinduced coma
The Dallas Morning News - 9 Jun 2020 - 1A - FROM WIRE REPORTS
Investors greeted the first recession in 11 years with yet another stock surge that sent the Nasdaq composite to a record and lifted the Standard & Poor’s 500 index into positive territory for the year.
U.S. stocks are on pace to post three straight months of gains on renewed optimism that the country is pushing out from its coronavirus stranglehold.
The federal government has fed trillions into the economy to keep it from descending into a depression.
Among the market highlights:
M@ The techheavy Nasdaq stormed to a record 9,924.75, a110point gain.
The previous milestone, 9,817.18, was set in February.
@ The S&P 500 finished at 3,232.39 to erase its losses for the year.
The S&P had been more than 30% in the hole three months ago.
@ The Dow Jones industrial average is on a sixday winning streak, its best since Septem ber.
States across the country are slowly relaxing restrictions on businesses meant to slow the spread of the coronavirus outbreak, which is raising expectations that the economy can pull out of its coma.
New York City, which has been the country’s hardesthit, began allowing retailers and some other businesses to reopen on Monday with some restrictions.
That puts more scrutiny on economic reports this week as investors look for confirmation that Friday’s jobs report was a true inflection point and not just an aberration.
Risks remain
Even if the economy did hit its bottom a month or two ago, economists warn that many risks are still looming over a very long road back to full recovery.
Critics are also still saying the stock market may have risen too quickly and may be setting investors up for disappointment, with the biggest risk being another wave of infections that leads to more lockdowns.
“Tt all starts with the virus itself, and there haven’t been any immediate rise in infections,” said Tom Martin, senior portfolio manager at Globalt Investments.
He’s still far from giving the allclear.
“There’s a lot of risk that businesses and the economy don’t recover as fast,” he said.
“When money starts running out in July, are we enough on a path to getting people employed and businesses open?”
Among this week’s economic highlights are reports on inflation and the number of workers applying for jobless benefits.
The headliner, though, is likely the Federal Reserve’s meeting on interest rates in the middle of the week.
The Fed has already promised unprecedented amounts of support to keep markets running smoothly, but market watchers will keep an eye on whether the recent upturn in job growth will mean a pullback.
‘Triumph of hope’
The stock gains come at a time when many indicators point to an economy that is wheezing from a onceinacentury pandemic.
On Monday, the National Bureau of Economic Research declared that the U.S. entered its first recession in nearly 11 years due to the “unprecedented magnitude of the decline and production, and its broad reach across the entire economy.”
The markets ignored the bad news.
“This appears to be the triumph of hope over experience,” said Michael Farr, president of Farr, Miller & Washington.
“People are believing the winwin scenario, which means either the recovery happens and corporate earnings really do recover and go up.
Or it means the government continues to add stimulus.
In short, the market doesn’t believe these are problems that a couple more trillion from the federal government can’t solve.”
The U.S. economy added 2.5 million jobs in May, the Labor Department reported Friday, a shockingly positive reading.
“This will go down in history as the biggest positive data shock for the markets and the economy,” said Mohamed Elerian in an interview on Fox News Sunday.
The employment picture continues to brighten, with as many as 400,000 people returning to work Monday in New York City, once the epicenter of the U.S. coronavirus outbreak.
The city is kicking off phase one of its reopening plan by allowing nonessential retailers, construction sites and manufacturing to resume operations.
Investors are also buoyed by a drumbeat of news over companies chasing cures for the coronavirus, which has killed more than 109,000 Americans.
Sectors bounce back
Many longtime Wall Street hands were caught flatfooted by the broad stock market’s steep ascent over the past month.
Many had put their faith in the stayathome technology stocks — such as Amazon, Netflix, Microsoft and Zoom — that have powered much of the stock market in recent years.
Hedge fund manager Stanley Druckenmiller told CNBC in an interview Monday that he was “humbled” that his personal investments have returned a mere 3% over the past month while the S&P turned in a 40% gain.
“Well I’ve been humbled many times in my career, and I’m sure I’ll be many times in the future.
And the last three weeks certainly fits that category,” Druckenmiller said.
Many sectors that people had long given up for dead have broken out from their coronavirus coma.
Airlines, cruise lines, oil companies, hotels, casinos and restaurants have all popped to the upside on the belief that people will resume their PRECOVID lives sooner rather than later.
The Nasdaq 100, an index of the biggest nonfinancial stocks, has hit a record on big advances by Fort Worthbased American Airlines, United Airlines, Wynn Resorts, Marriott International and Liberty Global.
Aerospace giant Boeing has staged a remarkable recovery, closing up 12.30% Monday at $230.50 as it led the Dow.
The company’s shares were selling at less than $100 in March.
