Hundreds march on City Hall in Arlington.
Day after protests turned chaotic, demonstrations are peaceful headed into night
The Dallas Morning News - 3 Jun 2020 - 1A - By REESE OXNER Special Contributor
ARLINGTON — During a protest Tuesday in Arlington, a white police officer approached an
intersection on Cooper Street and dropped to one knee.
7 =, - fi f: ‘a fi i
Protesters rushed forward to hug him, a show of appreciation for his support of the movement against police violence that has swept the nation.
Hundreds gathered near Arlington City Hall on Tuesday for the city’s second protest in response to the death of black Minneapolis resident George Floyd.
The protest remained peaceful into the early evening Tuesday, but it followed a day of protesting Monday that turned violent when busi
nesses including a Walmart near AT&T Stadium were looted.
Six people were arrested Monday, and police are continuing to investigate, said Lt. Chris Cook, Arlington Police spokesman.
Dallas and Fort Worth have also experienced nightly protests over the last several days, implementing curfews after incidents of looting and destruction of property accompanied peaceful protesting.
Arlington has not implemented a curfew, but the option isn’t off the table, Cook said.
On Tuesday, the protesters spent about an hour chanting and displaying signs to cars driving by before making their way down Cooper Street, often stopping to kneel in intersections.
“No justice, no peace,” Fort Worth resident Jibri Burgess said before referring to the four responding officers in the Floyd case.
“We need four convictions in this particular instance.”
Lack of change
The crowd came to a halt at the downtown library, kneeling in silence while Burgess spoke after being inspired by a fellow marcher, he said.
“The reason I stood up to speak today, man, was because the message that I was hearing from my black brother was that we need to continue doing the same thing we were doing when Martin Luther King Jr. was around,” he said.
“But we can see, in terms of racial progression, that nothing’s really happened since that time.
We haven’t gained any ground since then.
“But black people are understanding that power isn’t given,” he said.
“It’s taken.” Burgess said looting has occurred because of frustration over lack of change.
“They try to find a way through mainstream media to separate the protesters and the looters, when in fact, they’re the same group,” he said.
“Because people at large are upset, and they’re tired.”
He emphasized the need for black Americans to vote, distributing voter registration cards with other protesters.
Demonstrators continued to march on Cooper and around the edge of the University of Texas at Arlington campus, which had closed early in anticipation of protesters.
Chris Odgen, UTA’S men’s basketball coach, said he came to the protest with some of his players because it was important to show support.
They wore practice jerseys that listed the names of black men or women who inspired them, as well as a quote from Kobe Bryant, the late NBA superstar.
“Arlington is a very diverse community, as is UTA,” he said.
“T’m very hopeful and think there will be a lot of peaceful protesting out here.”
Cook said the city and Arlington police will discuss the possibility of a curfew.
“What we saw last night, which started as a peaceful assembly, quickly turned violent after some people started defacing law enforcement property, damaging private businesses and burglarizing retail stores,” said interim Police Chief Jaime Ayala.
“We will continue to support peaceful protests and people exercising their First Amendment rights,” Ayala said.
“We will not tolerate those individuals who plan to come to Arlington and detract from the overall message of criminal justice reform by engaging in criminal actions targeting our residents, officers and businesses.”
After the looting at Walmart, Cook said, about 75 cars drove to the Parks Mall, where a group broke into American Jewelry Exchange and took an undisclosed amount of jewelry.
Police pursued the suspects on Interstate 20, where the culprits tossed jewelry out the window and escaped.
Looters also attempted to break into a nearby Jared jewelry store but were stopped by police, Cook said.
Cars then drove to the Arlington Highlands development and broke a window in a vacant building near the James Avery jewelry store before police surged the area.
First Cash Pawn on Cooper Street was burglarized at around 3 a.m., Cook said, and police made one arrest there before the group left the area.
Six people arrested
Four people were arrested and charged with burglary and engaging in organized criminal activity related to the Walmart looting: Keniya Garrett of Arlington, Danecia Harris of Fort Worth, D’ANthony Reed of Grand Prairie and Breopthilus Williams of Fort Worth.
Two others were arrested after the burglary of First Cash Pawn: Cayson Truly of Duncanville, who was charged with burglary, evading arrest, failure to identify himself and a felony warrant from Dallas County; and Jason Simpson of Arlington, who was taken into custody on two outstanding misdemeanor warrants.
