Area tourism hit hard
Study: It will take 5 years to return to prepandemic level
Before the pandemic, visitors to North Texas pumped $8.8 billion a year into the area’s economy.
“We will need about five years to return to the booming numbers,” one tourism official says.
Dozens of hotels closed, multimilliondollar losses and thousands of people left unemployed.
That’s the toll of the coronavirus pandemic on the hospitality industry of North Texas.
According to Visitdallas, the agency supervising tourism in the city, up to 25 million people visited the city each year and 49 million visited the DallasFort Worth area before the coronavirus crisis.
Hotel occupancy averaged 69% of the more than 92,000 hotel rooms available in the area, and more than 65,000 people depended on one direct job in the hospitality industry.
Before the pandemic, visitors to North Texas generated an economic input of up to $8.8 billion a year.
“A big chunk of it has disappeared,” said Visitdallas director Craig Davis.
“T have been working for 30 years in the tourism industry and never imagined something like this could happen.
This pandemic has been nine times more devastating for the local tourism industry than 9/11 and the 2008 economic downturn combined,” he said.
His agency ordered a study to measure the impact of the pandemic on the Dallas tourism industry, and the results are not uplifting.
“We will need about five years to return to the booming numbers we had before the pandemic,” Davis said.
But he does have some good news.
“The study tells us hotel occupancy will recover in the next year, especially because hotels will have to significantly lower their prices in order to attract the lost market,” he said.
According to the Hotel Association of North Texas, average hotel occupancy in Dallas has fallen to under 10%, and the industry is expected to lose an estimated $567 million this year, down from the $1 billion hotels generated in 2019.
Low occupancy caused 15,000 to 25,000 people who worked in North Texas hotels to lose their jobs.
“This pandemic has been devastating for our industry,” said Traci Mayer, executive director of the Hotel Association of North Texas.
“In just a few
weeks, our industry sustained mass cancellations, 90% of employees were laid off and occupancy fell to the lowest levels in our history,” she said.
Mayer said that her association recently counted 23 hotels closed, even though some are now planning to relaunch some services.
She said that to attract guests again, hotels have decided to create strict cleaning protocols for the rooms and the rest of their facilities.
“Once people feel it’s safe to travel again, hotels will be ready to welcome them,” she said.
The Kay Bailey Hutchison Convention Center in downtown Dallas usually hosts hundreds of events each year.
Davis said that so far, 183 events scheduled by the convention center have been canceled, with substantial financial losses.
“We are speaking of hundreds of millions of dollars, perhaps thousands,” Davis said.
“We're not only speaking about the meetings at the convention center but about all the private events that have been canceled in hotels, like weddings and graduations, for instance,” he said.
Davis said that for Dallas to reboot its tourism trade, visitors will need things to do.
“Certainly, health is first, but I think the city of Dallas and the state of Texas are doing the right thing as far as progressively reopening their tourist attractions,” he said.
“We need restaurants, museums, zoos and sports events to be open so we can have products people want to visit.”
Davis said his agency has a big marketing campaign ready to kickstart tourism in Dallas, but it’s too early to launch it.
“All indications are people are still not confident enough to leave their homes.
We have a very ambitious campaign ready for launch, but we must wait for the right time.
We don’t want it to be too soon or too late to do it,” he said.
