Permission sought to remove memorial Confederate symbol could be toppled, cause harm, city tells court
Dallas city officials want a court’s permission to remove the Confederate War Memorial in Pioneer Park.
The city attorney’s office Wednesday filed an emergency motion with the Texas Fifth District Court of Appeals in Dallas, saying that if the 65foot obelisk is not removed from downtown and ends up being toppled during ongoing protests in the city, it “could seriously injure anyone nearby,” the motion said.
The city had planned to deploy additional police resources for a demonstration that had been anticipated this weekend at the monument near City Hall and the downtown convention center.
Dallas officials learned Thursday that the planned demonstrations were moved, and the city updated the courts, city spokeswoman Roxana Rubio said.
The Dallas City Council in February 2019 voted to remove the Confederate War Memorial, a display of a soldier surrounded by Confederate President Jefferson Davis and his generals, Robert E. Lee, Stonewall Jack
son and Albert Sidney Johnston.
But the court blocked the city based on a lawsuit filed by Return to Lee Park, a group led by former City Council candidate Warren Johnson and represented by Arlington attorney Warren Norred.
Statues vandalized
In a separate appeal to the Texas Supreme Court, Senior Assistant City Attorney Charles Estee wrote that the monument is seen as a “glorification of racism” and that the elected officials’ decision to remove the obelisk is intended to prevent it from becoming a focus of anger.
The city also intends to preserve the monument, the letter said.
“Its continued presence as required by the temporary injunction only increases the possibility of its destruction,” Estee wrote.
“While it will obviously take time to remove the monument, an immediate ruling by this court that the city is permitted to remove the monument will go a long way in healing the wounds of systemic racism that exists in the country.”
The letter comes amid a nationwide backdrop of protests against police brutality and racism, as well as the removal of monuments of Confederate leaders and Christopher Columbus.
Some monuments were toppled by protesters Wednesday, including one of Davis in Richmond, Va.
In Portsmouth, Va., four Confederate monument soldiers were graffitied and beheaded.
In the toppling of one of the figures this week, a man was hurt, according to The Virginianpilot.
A Robert E. Lee statue in Dallas was removed from Oak Lawn Park in 2017, auctioned for $1.4 million and placed in a golf course on the border of Mexico.
The Texas Ranger statue at Dallas Love Field was removed last week.
The order to pause the removal of Pioneer Park’s Confederate monument was issued in July 2019 by Justice Bill Whitehill of the Texas Fifth District Court of Appeals.
It came after Norred filed an emergency stay to stop the removal of the 122yearold Frank Teitch sculpture.
NASCAR’S action
The city’s current filing asks the court to reconsider dissolving its temporary injunction.
The appeals court and the Texas Supreme Court have asked Norred for a response, according to the city.
Norred didn’t respond to requests for comment Thursday.
Jennifer Scripps, director of the city’s Office of Arts and Culture, said Wednesday night that NASCAR’S recent decision to ban the Confederate flag at events “speaks volumes” about how harmful the symbol can be and validates the city’s moves.
She said she wished the city could’ve worked more quickly on the Confederate monument.
“Obviously we wish it had come down when everybody wanted it to,” Scripps said.
“It’s working its way through the courts.”
