Three memorials for George Floyd planned.
Organizers hope to acknowledge what he meant in life and death
The Dallas Morning News - 4 Jun 2020 - 1A - By NOMAAN MERCHANT
HOUSTON — The memorial services to honor George Floyd are extraordinary: three cities over six days, with a chance for mourners to pay their respects in the communities where he was born, grew up, and died.
Since his May 25 death in Minneapolis, Floyd’s name has been chanted by hundreds of thousands of people and empowered a movement.
Violent encounters between police, protesters, and observers have inflamed a country already reeling from the coronavirus pandemic.
The organizers of the memorials want to acknowledge the meaning Floyd had in life to his large family and the broader meaning he has assumed in death, which happened after a white officer pressed a knee into the handcuffed black man’s neck for several minutes even after Floyd stopped moving and pleading for air.
“Tt would be inadequate if you did not regard the life and love and celebration the family wants,” said the Rev.
Al Sharpton, the civil rights leader who will eulogize Floyd in two cities.
“But it would also be inadequate ... if you acted as though we’re at a funeral that happened under natural circumstances.”
“The family is not independent of the community, “he said.
“The family wants to see something happen.”
The first service will be Thursday afternoon at North Central University in Minneapolis.
Sharpton, founder of the National Action Network, and Floyd family attorney Ben
Crump will speak.
Floyd’s body will then go to Raeford, N.C., where he was born 46 years ago, for a twohour public viewing and private service for the family on Saturday.
Finally, a public viewing will be held Monday in Houston, where he was raised and lived most of his life.
A 500person service on Tuesday will take place at The Fountain of Praise church and will include addresses from Sharpton, Crump, and the Rev.
Remus Wright, the family pastor.
Former Vice President Joe Biden, the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee, may attend, and other political figures and celebrities are expected as well.
A private burial will follow.
The memorials in Minneapolis and Houston will include personal tributes and eulogies about social justice, Sharpton said.
