Trump targets unrest President threatens to move military into cities to stop violence
The Dallas Morning News - 2 Jun 2020 - 1A - FROM WIRE REPORTS
WASHINGTON — Amid racial unrest across the nation, President Donald Trump on Monday declared himself “the president of law and order” and threatened to deploy the United States military to American cities to quell arise of violent protests.
As Trump spoke, an incredible TV split screen developed around the White House.
While he addressed the nation in the White House’s idyllic Rose Garden, a series of military vehicles rolled out front on Pennsylvania Avenue and military police and law enforcement clashed with protesters at Lafayette Park.
Those peaceful demonstrators were cleared so Trump could walk across the park to St. John’s Episcopal Church, known as the “Church of the Presidents,” which suffered fire damage in a protest this week.
Holding a Bible, he then stood with several of his Cabinet members as the cameras clicked.
“We have the greatest country in the world,” Trump declared.
“We’re going to keep it safe.”
Trump said he would mobilize “thousands and thousands” of soldiers to keep the peace if governors did not use the National Guard to shut down the protests.
Loud tear gas explosions could be heard as authorities moved what appeared to be peaceful protests in the park.
The escalation came just after Attorney General William Barr came to the park to survey the demonstrators.
According to senior defense officials, between 600 and 800 National Guard members from five states were being sent to Washington to provide assistance.
Those troops were either already on the ground or will arrive by midnight.
Under the Civil Warera Posse Comitatus Act, federal troops are prohibited from performing domestic law enforcement actions such as making arrests, seizing property or searching people.
In extreme cases, however, the president can invoke the Insurrection Act, also from the Civil War, which allows the use of activeduty or National Guard troops for law enforcement.
The officials said that some of the National Guard in D.C. will be armed and others will not.
They said that the D.C. guard members do not have nonlethal weapons.
The military police that are visible in
the city are members of the Guard.
Earlier, in a call with governors, Trump and Barr encouraged more aggressive action against those who cause violence during protests across the country following the killing of George Floyd, a black man who died after a white Minneapolis policeman pressed his knee into his neck for several minutes even after Floyd stopped moving and pleading for air.
The demonstrations have turned violent in several cities, with fires ignited in Lafayette Park across from the White House.
Barr told the state leaders that law enforcement officials must “have adequate force” and “go after troublemakers.”
“Law enforcement response is not going to work unless we dominate the streets,” Barr said.
Show of force
On Monday evening, in a massive show of force, the National Guard fired sting balls and some form of tear gas at peaceful protesters outside the White House Trump appeared in the Rose Garden to announce the mobilization of “thousands and thousands of heavily armed soldiers” to quell “lawlessness” across the country.
After hundreds of protesters were pushed away from Lafayette Square, the president walked through the park to visit St. John’s Church.
D.C. Mayor Muriel Bowser, a Democrat, rolled back a curfew to 7 p.m. in hopes of avoiding another destructive night.
But the appearance of the National Guard and mounted U.S. Park Police brought the most aggressive law enforcement response yet.
With shields that said “military police,” the Guard members stood shoulder to shoulder, moving forward every few minutes.
When they knelt — as officers have been doing to show solidarity with demonstrators — the crowd cheered.
But protesters soon realized they were kneeling only to put on gas masks.
Minutes later, they began firing at the gathered masses, hitting protesters who were standing atop a bathroom that had been burned the night before.
One person fell from the structure.
The sudden use of force left protesters bruised, bleeding and in shock.
As the crowd was pushed down 16th Street, some yelled “walk!
walk!” in attempts to avoid a stampede.
“They flushing us out,” one protester told another.
White House spokesman Judd Deere defended the Guard’s actions in Lafayette Square, saying “the perimeter was expanded to help enforce the 7 p.m. curfew in the same area where rioters attempted to burn down one of our nation’s most historic churches the night before.
Protesters were given three warnings by the U.S. Park Police.”
Plea for peace
In Minneapolis, Floyd’s brother, Terrence, made an emotional plea at the site where Floyd was pinned to the pavement by an officer who put his knee on the handcuffed black man’s neck until he stopped breathing.
“Let’s switch it up, y’all.
Let’s switch it up.
Do this peacefully, please,” Terrence Floyd said.
The crowd chanted, “What’s his name?
George Floyd!” and “One down, three to go!” in reference to the four officers involved in Floyd’s arrest.
Officer Derek Chauvin has been charged with murder, but protesters are demanding that his colleagues be prosecuted, too.
All four were fired.
The gathering was part rally and part impromptu eulogy as Floyd urged people to stop the violence and use their power at the ballot box.
“Tf ’m not over here messing up my community, then what are you all doing?” he said.
“You all are doing nothing.
Because that’s not going to bring my brother back at all.”
The country has been beset by angry demonstrations for the past week in some of the most widespread racial unrest in the U.S. since the 1960s.
Spurred in part by Floyd’s death, protesters have taken to the streets to decry the killings of black people by police.
While most of the demonstrations have been peaceful, others have descended into violence, leaving neighborhoods in shambles, stores ransacked, windows broken and cars burned, despite curfews around the country and the deployment of thousands of National Guard members in at least 15 states.
Second autopsy
Trump told the nation’s governors in a video conference that they they “look like fools” for not deploying even more National Guard troops.
“Most of you are weak,” he said.
He added: “You’ve got to arrest people, you have to track people, you have to put them in jail for 10 years and you’ll never see this stuff again.”
Washington Gov.
Jay Inslee, a Democrat, dismissed Trump’s comments as the “rantings of an insecure man trying to look strong after building his entire political career on racism.”
Former Vice President Joe Biden, the Democratic presidential candidate, vowed to address institutional racism in his first 100 days in office.
He met in person with black leaders in Delaware and also held a virtual meeting with bigcity mayors.
Biden said hate emerges “when you have somebody in power who breathes oxygen into the hate.” Meanwhile, an autopsy commissioned for Floyd’s family found that he died of asphyxiation from neck and back compression, the family’s attorneys said.
That distinguishes it from the official autopsy, which said he died from the effects of being restrained along with underlying health problems and potential intoxicants in his system.
The official autopsy found nothing “to support a diagnosis of traumatic asphyxia or strangulation.”
The second autopsy was done by a doctor who also examined the body of Eric Garner, a New York man who died in an officer’s chokehold six years ago.
Thousands arrested
Authorities in many cities have blamed the violence on outside agitators, though have provided little evidence to back that up.
But on Monday, federal authorities arrested a 28yearold Illinois man, Matthew Lee Rupert, saying he had posted selfrecorded video on his Facebook page last week that showed him in Minneapolis handing out explosive devices and encouraging people to throw them at law enforcement officers.
The video also showed him attempting to light a business on fire, and looting, according to an FBI affidivit.
Early Sunday, he posted more videos of himself in and around Chicago, saying “let’s start a riot.”
He was arrested in Chicago for violating the city’s curfew.
At least 4,400 people nationwide have been arrested over the past week for such offenses as stealing, blocking highways and breaking curfew, according to a count by The Associated Press.
Police officers and National Guard soldiers enforcing a curfew in Louisville, Ky., killed a man early Monday when they returned fire after someone in a large group shot at them, police said.
In Indianapolis, two people were reported dead in bursts of downtown violence over the weekend, adding to deaths recorded in Detroit and Minneapolis.
