Dallas Mayor Eric Johnson sees hope for progress in the protest movement.
In fioght against racial injustice, area faith leaders turn to prayer
Led by Mayor Eric Johnson, a group of Dallas Church of Christ ministers united Saturday to tout prayer as an antidote to the strife that has gripped the city, and the country, in the wake of George Floyd’s death at the hands of a Minneapolis police officer.
“T believe in the power of prayer,” the mayor told about 30 attendees at the Dallas West Church of Christ, each among a handful invited by the ministers from their congregations.
“So I’m here to tell you that a prayer service is perfect for the times we’re in right now.” The site held resonance and significance for Johnson: It’s where he was baptized as a boy and ultimately developed his faith.
“The church means something to me, metaphorically and literally,” he said.
“This is where I go when I need help.”
The mayor’s remarks were prefaced by prayers led by each minister, each meant to last a symbolic eight minutes and 46 seconds.
“For eight minutes and 46 seconds, a human being with a heart and a soul had a knee pressed onto his neck on the rough pavement of a city street,” said John Mark Davidson of the Skillman Church of Christ.
“Even after he cried out that he couldn’t breathe.”
Streets and public squares nationwide have flowed with protesters amid the outcry that has since followed, including in Dallas — and Johnson took care to note the difference between those who protested and those who vandalized.
“They were not the same and never were,” he said.
That so many across the country have joined the call for racial equality and against police brutality gave him hope, he said, that those engaged in the decadeslong fight would no longer be limited mostly to those who had directly suffered.
‘“‘We’ve been taking to the streets for a long time,” he said.
“These protests suggest that maybe that has changed.
It’s good to see the zeal and enthusiasm from the people who are now embracing this issue.
This fight has been going on a long time, and it’s good to have allies who don’t look like us alongside us.”
As the city’s mayor, Johnson said he hoped to offer comfort, instill confidence and chart a path forward.
Protest, while important, “is inherently unsustainable,” he cautioned, and
eventually will have to give way to conversations about race and injustice in order to effect change.
“But those conversations won’t be fruitful if we haven’t had a conversion of hearts and minds,” he said.
Prayer, the leaders said, could be a powerful force against the turbulence of a nation gripped by grief, anger and weariness over a seemingly endless cycle of violence.
“Father, you don’t need us to tell you that we are in trouble at this hour,” said Jonathan Morrison of Cedar Crest Church of Christ.
“Our eyes are being opened to the very real problem of racism.
We ask that you bring restoration and healing and petition you for reconciliation.”
Johnson also called for vigilance against the threat of COVID19, which he said remains “very real” despite having taken a back seat to social unrest.
“It’s as serious now as it was a week ago,” he said.
“We’ve taken our eye off the ball.
The virus didn’t stop being deadly because we stopped thinking about it.”
Also among the speakers were J.K. Hamilton of Mountain View Church of Christ and Sammie Berry of the host congregation.
“People need to understand something about me,” the mayor said.
“Before Iam my mother and father’s child, before I am a black man, before I am a Texan or an American — I’m a member of the Church of Christ.
That informs everything I do.”
