Soccer project has its critics Area beneath 1345 had been sought for Deep Ellum parking
A plan to transform a dilapidated, littered patch under Interstate 345 into five fencedoff
soccer fields in Deep Ellum will come before the Dallas City Council on Wednesday.
Carpenter Park
cart” PTO IN
te Carpenter Park %
* DEEP ELLUM
Soccer fields
Soccer fields
SOURSE TOOT Mumps Use Agree i Suppermani Mo 2
To develop the soccer fields, Dallas city officials will need to approve ceding control of the space to the Texas Department of Transportation, which owns the land and which would then lease it to Roddrick West, the son of state Sen. Royce West.
The city and TXDOT have been sharing the space under the freeway since late 1992.
But some council members last week criticized the project as a shady boondoggle that needs more vetting.
And urbanists fear the temporary soccer fields could interfere with any future plans to possibly remove the interstate.
TXDOT is considering several plans for 1345, a1.4mile stretch of elevated overpass between Interstate 30 and North Central Expressway downtown — including removing it, an idea that’s garnered support from most of the sitting council members.
Sen. West has been a staunch opponent of removing the
Transportation and city officials promised the project wouldn’t stop the city from any future I345 plans.
If they decided to eliminate the freeway, they said, Roddrick West would have two years to remove the fields.
The city could also regain control of the land, TXDOT spokesman Tony Hartzel said.
Roddrick West said he was inspired by soccer fields under Interstate 95 in Miami, where he once lived, and wants to accomplish a similar development in Dallas — though he told council members he has no experience.
“T was born and raised here,” Roddrick West told council members at a May 18 transportation committee meeting.
“Deep Ellum has a big space in my heart.”
Timing questioned
Council member Chad West, who represents north Oak Cliff and isn’t related to the senator, said in the committee meeting that he had “never been more disappointed in city staff.”
He said he had trouble getting plans for the site and didn’t understand the rush to get the project going before TXDOT’S review of 1345 is completed.
A twoyear feasibility study started with public meetings in December.
“Me having to make three requests to get information on the site plan, that leaves a bad taste in my mouth,” the council member said.
“I like soccer.
I think the concept is unique, but the way we came about this bothers me.”
Council member Jaime Resendez, who represents southeast Dallas and used to work for Sen. West, said Friday he believes the project needs to be properly vetted.
“T would be hesitant to support the project at this time given so many questions that need to be answered,” Resendez said.
The agreement between TXDOT and the city covers land that affects plans for both the soccer fields and Carpenter Park, a 5.6acre development downtown widely supported by council members.
Some elected officials said they would prefer to see those two projects in separate agreements.
Critics of the project raised questions about Roddrick West’s support from TXDOT, while Deep Ellum neighborhood advocates say they had little success when they tried to get backing for another parking lot — which would be adjacent to parking already available there — for the past decade.
Council member Adam Bazaldua, who represents South Dallas, said the lack of public input “really stinks, in my eyes.”
Council member David Blewett, who represents downtown and Uptown, said voting on the plan now would be “a mistake.” He said he wants to talk to his constituents about it.
Nonprofit’s role
A big force behind the opposition to the soccer fields is the Coalition for a New Dallas, an organization that supports the philosophy of new urbanism and is focused on eliminating 1345 to connect South Dallas to downtown and Deep Ellum.
Over the years, the nonprofit has tried to beef up its political influence by hiring people who are well respected at City Hall and who have developed relationships with council members.
The coalition’s cofounder and D Magazine owner, Wick Allison, has also contributed to nine of the 14 council members’ campaigns.
Most vocal against the soccer fields were Chad West, who received the most contributions from the coalition at $2,000, and Bazaldua, who was given $1,500.
They said the contributions did not play any role in their votes.
Chad West said the money was “a drop in the bucket” for his campaign, which raised over $150,000 last year.
He said he was a strong advocate for urbanist ideas long before he was elected to the council.
Matt Tranchin, president of the Coalition for a New Dallas, said the nonprofit endorsed and supported candidates whose values aligned with the organization’s philosophy.
“The idea that a $1,000 contribution is going to sway someone’s vote on an issue that’s as significant as the future of our urban core is wild,” Tranchin said.
Carolyn King Arnold received a coalition contribution of $1,250, while Resendez, Paula Blackmon, Tennell Atkins, Omar Narvaez, Adam Mcgough and Lee Kleinman all received $1,000.
Pressing for parking
The Deep Ellum Foundation also had other ideas for that space — what it believes is longoverdue parking for the neighborhood.
Jon Hetzel, president of the Deep Ellum Foundation, said neighborhood advocates had been trying to get city officials to secure parking spaces in that lot for 10 years.
City officials have promised instead to turn another lot farther from Deep Ellum’s core into a parking lot, but Hetzel said he’s seen no official plans.
Hetzel said he trusts Roddrick West but still has questions about how the soccer field project began.
Attempts to reach Roddrick West on Friday were unsuccessful.
Hartzel, the TXDOT spokesman, said officials treated all proposals to lease the land the same and that the agency wasn’t approached by the Deep Ellum Foundation to provide parking on the lot.
Mayor Pro Tem Adam Medrano, who represents Deep Ellum, didn’t respond to requests for comment.
As crowds return to Deep Ellum, those who work in the neighborhood said they’re frustrated by the lack of parking.
Kleinman, the council member who represents Far North Dallas, said plans for the land haven’t come to fruition for more than a decade.
In the meantime, Roddrick West could make that space more productive, he said.
“T think it’s a good idea, and I think it’s one worth pursuing,” Kleinman said.
“T mean, we’re going to have recreational soccer in downtown Dallas — how great is that?”
