Unrest grows across nation
The Dallas Morning News - 31 May 2020 - 1A - The Washington Post, The Associated Press
Tense protests over the death of George Floyd and other police killings of black men grew Saturday from New York to Tulsa to Los Angeles, with police cars set ablaze and reports of injuries mounting on all sides as the country lurched into another night of unrest after months of coronavirus lockdowns.
The officer who held his knee to the 46yearold black man neck as he begged for air, Derek Chauvin, was arrested Friday and charged with thirddegree murder and seconddegree manslaughter, but that appeared to provide little balm.
At the epicenter of the national anguish, Minnesota Gov.
Tim Walz, a Democrat, mobilized his state’s entire National Guard for the first time Saturday.
Bracing for a fifth night of violence and riots, he warned that the destruction of past nights would be “dwarfed” by Saturday night.
“The situation in Minneapolis is no longer in any way about the murder of George Floyd,” Walz said.
“It is about attacking civil society, instilling fear and disrupting our great cities.”
Minneapolis Mayor Jacob Frey, a Democrat, agreed, saying the uprisings were perpetrated by people taking advantage of the discord.
“This is no longer about verbal expression,” he said.
“This is about violence, and we need to make sure that it stops.”
President Donald Trump tweeted his support of the National Guard deployment in Minneapolis, declaring “No games!”
Saturday night, Minneapolis police fired tear gas to hold back a group marching toward downtown and another group milling around the city police’s 5th Precinct station in violation of the city’s curfew.
The tougher tactics came after city and state leaders were criticized for doing too little to stop the violence.
Governors in other states also activated their Guards.
The Trump administration offered activeduty military forces to help quell the unrest, as Trump escalated his rhetoric against protesters, tweeting about the “unlimited power” of the military and the prospect of “many arrests.”
The threat did not deter multigenerational and multiracial crowds from thronging cities throughout much of the day.
The White House itself became a flash point, as demonstrators clashed with Secret Service officers outside the president’s residence.
The same anger that led throngs to seek to breach a barrier erected on Pennsylvania Avenue seized many other metropolitan areas.
After a tumultuous Friday night, racially diverse crowds took to the streets again Saturday for mostly peaceful demonstrations, but they were beginning to descend into violence:
Wf In Washington, the D.C. National Guard was called in as hundreds converged on the mall and pockets of violence erupted during a second straight night of protests.
@ In Los Angeles, the mayor declared a citywide curfew and later asked the governor to send in the National Guard.
Police used batons and fired rubber bullets to control protesters.
M@ In Seattle, police fired tear gas and stun grenades to try to disperse blackclad crowds that smashed downtown shopfronts, stole merchandise and tossed mannequins onto the street.
@ In New York City, video on social media showed officers using batons and shoving protesters down as they made arrests and cleared streets.
@ Nashville’s mayor declared a state of civil emergency after protesters set a fire inside the Metro Courthouse.
@ In Philadelphia, police vehicles were set ablaze and protesters tried to topple a statue of former Mayor Frank Rizzo.
Wi In Chicago, a crowd swinging blunt objects destroyed a black SUV in front of Trump International Hotel & Tower.
Police in riot gear pressed the crowd back with batons.
@ In Miami, some demonstrators torched police cars.
@ In Columbia, S.C., a television reporter for WISTV was injured by rocks thrown outside the main police station.
@ In St. Louis, police were investigating the death of a protester who climbed between two trailers of a Fed Ex truck and was killed when it drove away.
@ In Austin, protesters took over Interstate 35, freighted with symbolism because it cuts the city along racial and economic lines.
@ In Denver, hundreds lay down in front of the state Capitol for nine minutes — about the length of time Floyd’s neck was pinned under an officer’s knee — chanting, “I can’t breathe!”
Curfews aplenty
State officials instituted new curfews in metro areas including Philadelphia, Cincinnati, Louisville and Portland, Ore., after nearly 20 U.S. cities woke up Saturday to destruction and arrests.
People were also told to be off the streets of Atlanta, Denver, Los Angeles and Minneapolis — where thousands had ignored the same order the previous night.
Friday night and into Saturday morning, protesters had repeatedly clashed with police who, in some cases, used pepper spray and rubber bullets to quell crowds.
Demonstrators responded by chanting “I can’t breathe,” spray painting “Black Lives Matter” on buildings and closing off roads to demonstrate against police brutality.
Hundreds were arrested.
Many police departments reported injured officers, while social media was awash in images of police using forceful tactics, throwing protesters to the ground, using bicycles as shields and trampling one protester while on horseback.
In Oakland, Calif., authorities were investigating whether the shooting of two federal protective officers — one fatally — Friday night was related to a protest taking place at the time.
Someone drove up, shot the two and drove away.
“When someone targets a police officer or a police station with an intention to do harm and intimidate — that is an act of domestic terrorism,” acting Homeland Security Deputy Secretary Ken Cuccinelli said in Washington.
And a person was killed in the area of protests in downtown Detroit just before midnight Friday after someone fired into an SUV, officers said.
This week’s unrest recalled the riots in Los Angeles nearly 30 years ago after the acquittal of the white police officers who beat Rodney King, a black motorist who had led them ona highspeed chase.
The protests of Floyd’s killing have gripped many more cities, but the losses in Minneapolis have yet to approach the staggering totals Los Angeles saw during five days of rioting in 1992, when more than 60 people died, 2,o00plus were injured and thousands arrested, with property damage topping $1 billion.
In 17 USS.
cities since Thursday, police have made nearly 1,400 arrests.
Trump vs. D.C. mayor
Trump, who spent much of Saturday tweeting about the protests, spoke briefly to reporters before leaving for Florida for the SpaceX launch.
He attacked Minneapolis’s handling of the protests, urging law enforcement to “get tougher” and suggesting that “by being tougher they will be honoring [Floyd’s] memory.”
The second day of clashes in Washington erupted just hours after Trump, responding to Friday night’s unrest in Washington, made a string of inflammatory tweets.
He began by saying the Secret Service had been “very cool & very professional” during protests outside the White House.
He also said “the most vicious dogs, and most ominous weapons” could have been deployed had the demonstrators gotten closer.
On social media and at an afternoon news conference, District of Columbia Mayor Muriel Bowser, a Democrat, called the reference to “vicious dogs” a “not too subtle reminder to African Americans of the segregationists who let dogs out on women, children and innocent people in the South.”
“T’m just shaken that an American president would utter such words about fellow Americans,” Bowser said.
In another tweet, Trump seemed to encourage his own supporters to come to Pennsylvania Avenue on Saturday evening: “Tonight, I understand, is MAGA NIGHT AT THE WHITE HOUSE??
?”
He denied later that the tweet was meant to incite racial tensions, saying it was meant as a question because he had heard that his supporters wanted to be at the protests.
“T have no idea if they are going to be here, I was just asking,” he said.
