2020. 6. 18. Series tells river’s stories

Series tells river’s stories

Chicago producer who grew up in area says his YouTube videos will eventu-
ally be a documentary.

Daily Southtown - 12 Jun 2020 - 1 - By Annie Alleman

The Great Calumet River is 100 miles long and flows through 17 municipalities. Filmmaker
Chuck Przybyl never thought much about it until he flew a drone overhead — and realized
there was more than meets the eye.

    

 

RSC SSG || histatins

So, the Chicago film producer decided to share with the world the way he saw the Calumet.
With his production company, Most Visual, he has launched Calumet Films, a web series
centered on the Calumet region. The region stretches from Chicago to Michigan City, Indi-
ana, and is known mostly for its heavy industry.

Through the film series, he is hoping to tell the stories of people working to change the
area.

There are three short documentary episodes on the YouTube channel so far. In the first
episode, Little Calumet River steward Michael Taylor is filmed giving children kayak
lessons. He calls the river a “hidden gem.” Jessica Becker, a program specialist with the
Forest Preserves of Cook County, talks about cleanup efforts on the river.

The second episode is a slice of life of third-generation farmer Kyle Wilson at Chellberg
Farm, the small working farm within the Indiana Dunes National Park in Porter.

The third video spotlights the Indian Creek slag contamination. It’s a sobering look at the
industrial pollution residents of the Hegewisch neighborhood of Chicago have been facing
for years. In October, the Environmental Protection Agency announced the addition of the
Schroud Property to the Superfund National Priorities List, Przybyl said.

Future episodes will show the current state of the Grand Calumet River — formally the

most polluted body of water in North America; and a portrait of Marktown — the urban
https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/2020061 2/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. Series tells river’s stories

planned community in East Chicago where people park on the sidewalks and walk on the
streets; and activities like surfing and birding in the Calumet Region.

Eventually, the web series will be crafted into a documentary, he said.

“T went where the stories were taking me and I met a lot of interesting people who were
doing great things in the area,” he said.

Przybyl is originally from Calumet City, Illinois, and North Hammond, Indiana, and
wanted to explore with fresh eyes some of the areas he’d grown up in.

In 2014, he made a short autobiographical film. He used a drone to capture footage of the
area he grew up in, mainly in North Hammond, to see where his neighborhood was tucked
in amidst the industry, he said.

“T noticed of the Grand Calumet River that there were sections that looked very healthy,”
he said. “I always considered it (polluted) but over here off the toll road it looked like a
beautiful wilderness.”

He began filming on the river in 2016 and from there he began seriously pursuing a docu-
mentary on the Grand Calumet River and the Greater Calumet Region. He spent the next
few years crafting the stories he found into the web series.

“The story of the area has been for a long time ‘massive industry comes in and destroys
nature and everyone that lives there just has to deal with it,’ ” he said. “That was the story
for a long time. What I was looking for were more positive stories, because I was really im-
pressed with what people are doing in the area to make it better.

“A lot of aspects of the Calumet River are better than what they used to be. There are all
these pockets of natural areas that are really wonderful. There is a side of me that wants to
make sure I’m telling positive stories of the area and that it’s not all doom and gloom. It’s
sort of having this green resurgence and that’s sort of happening next to these huge in-
dustrial areas at the same time and both

things are co-existing, which is really great.”

One reason for highlighting Chellburg Farm is because it is a positive story, he said.

“It has a rich history of the area,” he said. “It’s also part of one of the jewels of the area,
the Indiana Dunes National Park. It’s an industrial area but there are a lot of things that
pull people back to nature in the area.”

He thinks that people will be surprised at how much cleaner and better the area has gotten
over the years, thanks to the efforts of volunteers dating back 40 years.

“T think now... we are reaping the rewards of this. We’re talking generations in the mak-
ing,” he said.

He has enjoyed being able to explore the stories of the Calumet regions, he said.

“Even though we’ve been working on it for a long time, it feels like we’ re just getting
started,” he said. “There’s a lot of stories to tell in the area. There’s a rich history and
there’s a great future that lies ahead.”

Go to youtube.com and search for Calumet Films.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/2020061 2/page/1/textview 2/2
