2020. 6. 18. Freshly minted graduate enjoyed Marist career but ready to turn new page at Clemson

Freshly minted graduate enjoyed Marist career but ready to
turn new page at Clemson

Freshly minted graduate enjoyed Marist career but is now ready to turn new
page at Clemson

Daily Southtown - 27 May 2020 - 1 - By Tony Baranek

When Camryn Hannah gets to college, she will bring a legacy as one of the best girls vol-

leyball players in Marist history.

   

 

Marist senior Camryn Hannah is always excited to talk about her upcoming women’s vol-
leyball career at Clemson.

On Sunday, however, she was just as excited to talk about her just-completed graduation
ceremony.

“We had a virtual graduation, so we were tuned into a live broadcast at a church,” Hannah
said. “First we had a mass, and then we had an award ceremony.

“Then we had the actual graduation, where they called our names and they would show
our freshman year picture and our senior year picture.”

Not a bad substitute for the real thing? “It was fun,” Hannah said. “It was kind of nice to
be able to sit at home with my family. It stunk that I couldn’t be with my friends, but I did
get to celebrate.”

Exactly when she will be leaving for Clemson in South Carolina depends on the ongoing
developments in the coronavirus pandemic.

“Right now, they’ve canceled summer housing, so we can’t go there and live on campus,”
Hannah said. “We’re kind of waiting to see what football does.

“Obviously, the school kind of runs on football. So whatever they do is probably what the
rest of us will do.”

In the meantime, Hannah has been working out five to six days a week. When she arrives at
Clemson, she will be bringing along a legacy as one of the best girls volleyball players in

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200527/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. Freshly minted graduate enjoyed Marist career but ready to turn new page at Clemson

Marist history.

The 6-foot-2 right-side hitter/setter was the Daily Southtown Player of the Year in 2018
and 2019. As asenior, she produced 410 kills, 217 assists, 208 digs and 107 blocks in leading
the RedHawks to a third-place finish in the state in Class 4A.

The two previous seasons, she also was a team leader as Marist won back-to-back state
championships.

Quite a resume.

“T think it was definitely unexpected,” Hannah said. “I did not go there thinking, ‘Oh,

we’ re going to win state championships.’ I didn’t expect to do it once, let alone twice. It
was more than I could have hoped for.”

Hannah’s arrival at Marist coincided with Jordan Vidovic taking over as coach for Julie
Popp Hopkins.

“That was kind of a shock for all of us,”

Hannah said. “It kind of threw us off. I was like, ‘All right, I don’t know who coach Vidovic
is.’ But he changed our program for the better, and he really pushed us and made us that
much better.

“T think he made me much more prepared for college.”

Jordan, for one, believes Hannah is ready to step right up and be an immediate college
contributor.

“T don’t know the breakdown of Clemson’s roster and where the positions break down,”
Vidovic said. “But I think physically and potential-wise, she can be a big-time player and
make a massive impact.

“She can touch 10-8 or 10-10. Touching 10 feet for a girl is extremely rare, especially at the
high school level. And she’s a skilled player, too. There will be an adjustment period for
her, but I don’t know if I’ve ever been as excited to see a player move on to that next level.”
Hannah won’t be lacking confidence. “I think I’m ready,” Hannah said. “I thrive when I
am challenged. I’m really looking forward to being a freshman again and having to fight
for a spot.

“Honestly, I don’t think I’ve had a chance to wrap my head around it yet. My parents asked
me how felt, and I said that I don’t feel different right now. But I know it’s going to hit me
when I walk on the campus.

“T’m excited for the next chapter.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200527/page/1/textview 2/2
