2020. 6. 18. Why rush back to the classroom?

Why rush back to the classroom?
Remote learning couldn’t be worse than the way school used to be

Daily Southtown - 10 Jun 2020 - 1 - DAVID MCGRATH

While many wonder if schools can ever return to prepandemic norms, I see a solution for
both summer and fall based on local school history.

 

 

 

 

Gov. J.B. Pritzker issued an executive order last week allowing inperson summer school to
resume with COVID-19 restrictions in place. While many wonder if schools can ever return
to pre-pandemic norms, I see a solution for both summer and fall based on local school
history.

There were 1,200 pupils at St. Bernadette’s, my local grammar school, when I attended in
the 1950s and early ’60s. We were the baby boomers, and each class overflowed with any-
where from 50 to 60 students.

Most of the Catholic nuns who were our teachers did not have college degrees. Their
preparation consisted of a high school diploma and copious amounts of prayer.

The result was a perfect storm of educational mayhem, which, were to happen today,
would cause schools to shut down and parents to show up at board meetings carrying
torches.

But what kept St. Bernadette’s and similar institutions open was the badly kept secret that
the nuns, with tacit acceptance from parents and police, kept order by beating hell out of
us with paddles, sticks and bare hands and “taught” us with minimal live instruction and
maximum use of silent busy work, meaning handouts, drills, work books and study peri-
ods.

High school got a bit better since classes were smaller and teachers were more educated.
Still, I sensed something was wrong. In the early ’60s, attentiondeficit/hyperactivity dis-
order was not yet a thing, although I and a lot of my pals may have experienced it. That’s
because in any class in which a teacher was not a showman — someone who today is often
called a “performance teacher” — I was bored out of my gourd and simply could not pay
attention.

Dorothy Strang and John George were two performance teachers I had at Evergreen Park
High School, able to make their English and physical education classes the only gripping

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/2020061 0/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 18. Why rush back to the classroom?

and challenging 50-minute periods each day.

In my other classes, I daydreamed, drew a lot of pictures (cars, elephants, elaborate sailing
ships), but mostly read books I liked by John Steinbeck, Alistair MacLean and Albert
Payson Terhune, propping them up on the inside of the oversized textbooks that the other
teachers clung to and taught from, page by tedious page.

At home, I could complete the homework by finding the relevant paragraphs in the text-
book, the method by which, along with the help of a little bit of cramming the night before
a test, I was able to earn A’s and B’s.

When I got to college, I was tickled to find that institutions of higher education had already
adopted my school strategy. Either that, or because lecture halls hadn’t enough seats for
students avoiding death and the draft during the Vietnam War, a ton of professors told
students that attendance was not compulsory and we could pass with flying colors by
keeping up with the reading, showing up on test day or opting for the very popular take-
home exam.

An exception was an elderly biology teacher, whose classes I endured in my usual way by
covertly reading biographies of luminaries like Abraham Lincoln and Gregor Mendel, the
latter of which helped me get the highest score on our midterm genetics exam.

At the end of four years, I got my degree with a cum laude designation, due in no small part
to my supplemental reading and individual enrichment program.

My point being, my entire education consisted of 16 years of haphazard self-instruction,
individual reading, private study sessions, worksheets coming out of my ears and, of
course, term papers, with a few inspirational teachers and electrifying film strips tossed in.
Essentially similar to remote or online learning.

Which is why no schools in Illinois or elsewhere need to risk the health of their students or
community by re-opening schools if the risk of contagion remains unacceptable.

If my classmates and I were able to keep pace, in spite of everything, for 16 years, certainly
the current crop of pupils can endure for another single semester with remote learning
since all that is required is a sufficient wi-fi signal and the same dedicated teachers.

While it did not always work smoothly this past spring, online classes will only get better
as teachers and students become more accustomed to the medium, realizing its potential
for creativity and achievement.

Fears that exceptional students would not thrive in remote learning proved incorrect. In
the essay “The Empty Couch” in the most recent edition of the New Yorker, Adam Glopnik
wrote of the phenomenon lately realized that children with ADHD and other disorders are
actually doing better when not having to sit and focus all day in a classroom.

And the notion that different learning styles preclude success in remote learning is not
true, according to Dr. Matt Houston writing in Psychology Today (“Myths of the Mind,”
2020). While some students may prefer verbal, or auditory, or illustrative lessons, science
supports their ability to adapt and learn by multiple means.

Yes, there is the sticky matter of supervision of younger students as more adults return to
work. But if the improvised system families used this past spring of enlisting grandparents
or the oldest child or by spouses taking turns doesn’t work, there’ll be a slew of school ad-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/2020061 0/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 18. Why rush back to the classroom?

ministrators with little else to do who can address the problem, and even fill in, at least
until Christmas.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/2020061 0/page/1/textview 3/3
