2020. 6. 18. ‘IT IS AGRIM MILESTONE’

‘IT IS AGRIM MILESTONE’
In four months, U.S. surpasses 100,000 deaths from pandemic

Daily Press - 28 May 2020 - 1 - Associated Press

HARTFORD, Conn. — The U.S. surpassed a jarring milestone Wednesday in the coronavirus
pandemic: 100,000 deaths.

   
 

That number is the best estimate and most assuredly an undercount. But it represents the
stark reality that more Americans have died from the virus than from the Vietnam and
Korea wars combined.

“It is a grim milestone,” said Josh Michaud, associate director of global health policy with
the Kaiser Family Foundation in Washington. “It’s a striking reminder of how dangerous
this virus can be.”

Worldwide, the virus has infected more than 5.6 million people and killed more than
350,000, with the U.S. having the most confirmed cases and deaths by far, according to a
tally by Johns Hopkins University. Europe has recorded about 170,000 deaths, while the
U.S. reached

more than 100,000 in less than four months.

The true death toll from the virus, which emerged in China late last year and was first re-
ported in the U.S. in January, is widely believed to be significantly higher, with experts say-
ing many victims died of COVID-19 without ever being tested for it.

At the end of March, the United States eclipsed China with 3,500 deaths. Now, the U.S. has
not only the highest death total, but the highest number of confirmed cases of COVID-19 in
the world, making up more than 30% of the global total.

The stark reality comes as only half of Americans said they would be willing to get vacci-
nated if scientists are successful in developing a vaccine, according to a new poll released
Wednesday from The Associated Press- NORC Center for Public Affairs Research.

Dr. Anthony Fauci, the nation’s top infectious disease expert, issued a stern warning after
viewing video showing Memorial Day crowds gathered at a pool party in Missouri.

“We have a situation in which you see that type of crowding with no mask and people in-

teracting. That’s not prudent and that’s inviting a situation that could get out of control,”
https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200528/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 18. ‘IT IS AGRIM MILESTONE’

he said during an interview Wednesday on CNN. “Don’t start leapfrogging some of the rec-
ommendations in the guidelines because that’s really tempting fate and asking for trou-
ble.”

After months of lockdowns in countries around the world, places have begun reopening in
stages. Mediterranean beaches and Las Vegas casinos laid out plans to welcome tourists
again. Churches began opening up. And humans restless at being cooped up indoors for
weeks began venturing outside in droves, often without practicing safe social distancing or
wearing protective coverings.

Summertime is already a time when more people head outdoors. This year, it also means
the every-fouryears national political conventions in the United States where the two ma-
jor political parties anoint a presidential candidate.

The events generally draw thousands of delegates and others who converge for several
days. Fauci said it’s too early to say whether this year’s conventions should be held as nor-
mal.

“Tf we have a really significant diminution in the number of new cases and hospitalizations
and we’re at a level where it’s really very low, you might have some capability of gather-
ing,” he said. “But I think we need to reserve judgment right now, because we’re a few
months from there. Hopefully we will see that diminution. If we don’t, then I would have
significant reservation about that.”

And other public health experts cautioned that even more death is in the offing.

“Despite the terrible losses seen and the many difficulties Americans have faced to date in
this pandemic, we’re still probably only in the early stages,” said Josh Michaud, associate
director of global health policy with the Kaiser Family Foundation in Washington. “In the
U.S. we could be looking at a long pandemic summer with a slow burn of cases and deaths.
There’s also reason to be concerned about a new wave of infections in the fall. So, we’re
definitely not out of the woods yet.”

South Korea announced a spike in new infections and considered reimposing social dis-
tancing restrictions, revealing the setbacks ahead for other nations on the road to reopen-
ing. That country reported 40 newly confirmed cases — the biggest daily jump in nearly 50
days.

All but four of the cases were in the densely populated Seoul region, where officials are
scrambling to stop transmissions linked to nightclubs, karaoke rooms and a massive e-
commerce warehouse. All were reopened last month when social distancing measures were
relaxed.

Worldwide, the virus has infected nearly 5.6 million people and killed over 350,000, in-
cluding about 170,000 in Europe, according to a tally by Johns Hopkins University of gov-
ernment reports, which experts say does not show the entire scope of the pandemic. As of
Wednesday afternoon, the official tally of deaths in the U.S. pushed just over 100,000.

In the U.S., President Donald Trump several months ago likened the coronavirus to the flu
and dismissed worries that it could lead to so many deaths. The administration’s leading
scientists have since warned that as many as 240,000 Americans could die in the country’s
outbreak.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200528/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 18. ‘IT IS AGRIM MILESTONE’

According to the APNORC poll, about half of Americans said they would get a COVID-19
vaccine if scientists working to create one succeed.

The poll found 31% simply weren’t sure if they’d get vaccinated. Another 1 in 5 said they’d
refuse. Among Americans who say they wouldn’t get vaccinated, 7 in 10 worry about safety.
“T am not an antivaxxer,” said Melanie Dries, 56, of Colorado Springs, Colorado. But, “to
get a COVID-19 vaccine within a year or two causes me to fear that it won’t be widely tested
as to side effects.”

Among those who want a vaccine, the AP-NORC poll found protecting themselves, their
family and the community are the top reasons.

“T’m definitely going to get it,” said Brandon Grimes, 35, of Austin, Texas. “As a father
who takes care of his family, I think it’s important for me to get vaccinated as soon as it’s
available to better protect my family.”

Most people who get COVID-19 have mild cases and recover. However, the coronavirus has
been seen attacking in far stealthier ways — from blood clots to heart and kidney damage.
Worldwide, about a dozen COVID-19 vaccine candidates are in early stages of testing or
poised to begin.

U.S. officials are pushing hard to reopen even as more than a dozen states are still seeing
increasing new cases.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200528/page/1/textview 3/3
