2020. 6. 18. AFTER INITIAL DELAY, PARTS OF STATE SET TO REOPEN FRIDAY

AFTER INITIAL DELAY, PARTS OF STATE SET TO REOPEN
FRIDAY

Accomack, Richmond and Northern Virginia to enter Phase 1 ‘deliberately,’
Northam says

Daily Press - 28 May 2020 - 1 - By Marie Albiges Staff writer

The three regions of Virginia that have yet to begin reopening because of concerns over
coronavirus trends will be able to do so starting Friday, Gov. Ralph Northam said.
Accomack County, Richmond and localities in Northern Virginia will be allowed to enter
Phase 1 at the end of the week, two weeks behind the rest of the state, which entered Phase
1on May 15.

“As we move forward thoughtfully and deliberately, we all must stay vigilant — following
the guidelines, wearing masks inside, and looking out for each other,” Northam said ina
tweet formally announcing the reopening on Wednesday.

Officials from the three regions had asked Northam to delay their entrance into Phase 1,
which allows restaurants to operate at 50% capacity as long as they only provide outdoor
seating, and allows retail to open at 50% capacity.

It also allows some businesses

that have been closed entirely, such as hair salons, to reopen with restrictions.

Northam had previously called the three-phased reopening plan a “floor,” saying locali-
ties could put further restrictions on establishments if they thought it necessary.

The three regions will now join the rest of the state in Phase 1, and Northam said Tuesday
it was too soon to determine when Virginians could expect to move into Phase 2.
Accomack County on the Eastern Shore is home to several poultry processing plants that
have reported outbreaks of coronavirus over the past few weeks, leading the Centers for
Disease Control to visit the area and assist with testing. On Wednesday, the state health
department reported Accomack had 780 coronavirus cases, with 42 people hospitalized.
Accomack hit its peak on May 15, when the state health department reported 55 new posi-
tive coronavirus cases in the county. The Eastern Shore, which also includes Northampton
County, has a seven-day positivity rate of 14.3% for naval swab and antibody tests as of
Wednesday, compared to the state rate of 12.9%. The Eastern Shore’s positivity rate has
been trending downward since April 28.

The city of Richmond has 1,112 positive cases and 137 hospitalizations. The city hit its peak
on May 16, when the state health department reported 76 new cases. The city’s seven-day
positivity rate is 21.8% — it dipped slightly in early May before rising again.

Leaders in Northern Virginia told the governor they had reached four of the six bench-
marks needed to enter into Phase 1, including decreased hospitalization rates and a 14-day
declining trend in the number of positive coronavirus cases.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200528/page/1/textview 4/1
