2020. 6. 18. ‘She just fights all the time’

‘She just fights all the time’

Heart transplant on pause, Glenwood woman, family spend pandemic ad-
vocating for organ donation

Daily Southtown - 9 Jun 2020 - 1 - By Ginger Brashinger

“T’m feeling all types of emotions. I’m excited to get it over with, to move on. I want to feel
better.”

 

 

   

Kimberly Giles, 34, has been living a full life with half a heart.

Giles was born with a congenital heart defect that left her with two heart chambers instead
of four. From the first month of her life, Giles has endured numerous heart surgeries, in-
cluding four open heart procedures.

But she has never stopped moving forward.

“She just fights all the time,’ said Giles’ mother, Cindi Hall, recalling the time Giles re-
turned to her classes at Governors State University after open heart surgery.

“Two weeks after having her chest broken open, she went, she fought,” Hall said. Hall said
she and her husband, Dave, would carry their daughter’s books into the classroom because
Giles was prohibited from lifting anything after surgery and wait in the car while their
daughter attended class.

Giles completed her courses despite her heart defect, called Double Inlet Left Ventricle and
Transposition of the Great Vessels, and has gone on to earn both a bachelor’s and master’s
degrees in Health Administration from GSU.

And Giles has continued to live life to its fullest.

She has been married to Gary Giles for seven years and has worked for Advocate South
Suburban Hospital in the Medical Credentialing division at the medical staff office.

Most people have no idea what challenges Giles faces every day as she tries to lead a nor-
mal life.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200609/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 18. ‘She just fights all the time’

“Kim has done well. She looks good,” Dave Hall said. “To look at Kim, unless you saw her
scar, you wouldn’t realize there was anything wrong with her.”

Giles’ family said she has not used her serious health condition to get out of work, instead
pushing herself to work full time and becoming an expert in her field of medical creden-
tialing.

The Halls said even doctors who worked with Giles didn’t know until recently about her
“complex heart condition” and those who treated her didn’t know she has a career.

“Her cardiologist is amazed she was working a full time job,” Cindi Hall said. “She just
fights all the time.”

In February, 2017, Kim had to once again fight for her life. A pulmonary embolism caused a
severe stroke which left the entire left side of her body debilitated.

“T lost control of the whole left side of my body,” Giles said. “I had to learn to walk again,
write, drink...”

Family members stepped in to help. Gary Giles played hand-eye coordination games with
her, Cindi Hall stayed with her daughter when Gary was working, and Cindi and Dave Hall
became “Uber Mom and Uber Dad” to get Kimberly to therapy and appointments, and
Kimberly successfully overcame the stroke in six months.

“It’s actually an amazing feeling knowing that I have the support that I do — my parents,
my husband,” Giles said.

Giles returned to work part time after therapy and within three months returned to full
time work until the end of 2019, when it became apparent something was very wrong.

“At that point, I had to take my leave of absence,” she said.

Giles was unable to keep up with her work, tired all the time and had no endurance, she
said.

Her cardiac heart failure enzymes “kept climbing higher and higher” and in Feb. 2019,
there was no doubt the time had come for a heart transplant.

But there was more news. Over the years, Giles had developed a high antibodies condition
because of the many transfusions she has endured during seven heart surgeries. The con-
dition causes a “highly sensitized immune system” which would attack a transplant organ.
Giles has also developed cardiac cirrhosis of the liver caused by the way her blood circu-
lates. Her liver must also be replaced.

These conditions not only make finding a donor more difficult, but cause her to be at high
risk for organ transplant rejection.

Without the double transplant, her family said, Giles has been told she will not live to be 40
years old.

“T’m feeling all types of emotions,” Kimberly Giles said. “I’m excited to get it over with, to
move on. I want to feel better. I want to be able to go out and do things again. So in that re-
gard I want to get through it and get back to normalcy, a normal life,

— Kimberly Giles

but there’s still the anxiety of going through it all, It kind of scares me a little bit.”

Cindi Hall said the family will “do whatever it takes” to help Kimberly. These days “what-
ever it takes” means finding a way to support Giles while she awaits her double transplant
at Cedars-Sinai Hospital in Los Angeles, California.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200609/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 18. ‘She just fights all the time’

Giles had hopes of having her surgery done at near home and family. Originally on a heart
transplant list at Northwestern Memorial Hospital in Chicago, Giles was recently removed
because of the high risks and referred to CedarsSinai, world renowned for its heart trans-
plant program and where trials on high antibodies are being conducted, Dave Hall said.
““We’re hoping a lot of the meds will be covered because of the trial,” he said.

There is much more than medication that will need to be covered. The Halls plan to accom-
pany their daughter and will need to find accommodations in Los Angeles, they said.

The wait for a donor, the surgery and the recovery will take up to two years, the Halls said.
Their stay in California will require lodging and other necessities. Gary Giles will continue
to work and live in Illinois and visit his wife as often as he can and family members will
care for the Halls’ home in Glenwood.

To cover expenses, which the Halls fear will be higher in Los Angeles than their home, the
Halls and family and friends of Giles planned to hold a fundraiser earlier this year to follow
one held in 2019. But the COVID-19 epidemic put a hold on large gatherings as well as the
necessary testing at a local hospital Giles needs before she can leave for Cedars-Sinai.
Giles has received an outpouring of support from the Glenwood community, the family
said. When family and friends began distributing “green for organ transplants” ribbons to
tie on trees and lamp posts and placed signs in the neighborhoods, the community re-
sponded, including a marquee message of support for Giles at the Glenwood Fire Station
and a parade of 12 village vehicles and about 40 residents’ decorated cars.

“Tt was just overwhelming,” Giles said.

And in the meantime, she’s trying to do her part by advocating for organ donation. The
Giles family has also posted a Facebook page to follow Giles’ journey and to inform about
and encourage organ transplants.

To follow Kimberly Giles and learn about organ transplants at Heart Strong-Journey to
Transplants, go to https://www.facebook .com/kg10140921.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200609/page/1/textview 3/3
