2020. 6. 18. LONG TIME, NO SEA

LONG TIME, NO SEA
Swimmers few and far between as Hampton beaches reopen

Daily Press - 30 May 2020 - 1 - BY MATT JONES Staff writer

The sun was shining. The water was chilly. And for the first time in months, there were
people sunbathing and swimming Friday afternoon at Hampton’s public beaches.

   

Sa ite
—_— ~

a)

“It was absolute joy,” said Monica Brogan, an open-water swimmer whose club went on
its first swim together at the beach in months Friday morning. “Just to take your feet off
the bottom and be in the waves and swim at good old Buckroe was a real gift.”

Gov. Ralph Northam ordered beaches closed on March 30 to all activities except fishing and
exercise. Although Virginia Beach was allowed to open for Memorial Day weekend, other
spots across the region were still closed. On Thursday, he announced that all beaches could
reopen.

On Friday, the city of Hampton opened beaches at Buckroe, Fort Monroe, Salt Ponds and
Grandview to more activities including swimming, sunbathing and playing in the sand.
The city also opened both

municipal golf courses and the Hampton Tennis Center to players. The Buckroe Farmers
Market will happen Saturday at 9 a.m. for the first time this season.

Other area beaches are opening this weekend too, including Yorktown Beach on Saturday.
Paradise Ocean Club, which has a private beach at the northern end of Fort Monroe, also
opened.

There are still rules in place. No groups of umbrellas or groups of more than 10 were al-
lowed, groups sports were forbidden and groups of people had to remain 6 feet apart.
Lifeguards and police officers were at Outlook Beach on Fort Monroe and Buckroe Beach
watching the people who did come out. Turnout was light though, with only a handful of
families and groups out.

The city also stationed beach “ambassadors” to monitor social distancing and let people
know about the rules. Kirstin Danley, a parks, recreation and leisure services employee
who normally works at West Hampton Community Center, was one of those ambassadors,
stationed on a bench along the boardwalk at Fort Monroe.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200530/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. LONG TIME, NO SEA

“We make small conversations, just to see how they’ re doing, telling everybody to keep
safe,” Danley said.

She said that attendance was better than she had expected, with a few groups spread out
apart sitting in the sand in the beach’s coves. Rain was in the forecast, but the sun was still
shining early Friday afternoon.

“A few people asked if the beach was open, we said yes,” Danley said. “They’re keeping so-
cial distancing and everything.”

Brogan was one of the first swimmers out at Buckroe Beach. She’s a member of the Buck-
roe Open Water Swimmers, a group of long-distance swimmers who are in the water year-
round at the beach.

They had gotten in one swim together this year before the beach closed. Since then,
they’ve gotten creative about practicing, swimming at private beaches and in small back-
yard pools, doing exercises on land.

“We abided by the rule and didn’t complain, and we’re so grateful that we’re open now,”
Brogan said.

Friday morning at 9 a.m. was their first swim together in months, even though the water
was abnormally cold for May.

Brogan is a regular at the beach and knows many of the lifeguards. She was happy to watch
them get on their stands Friday morning to signify the water was open for swimming.
“When you lose something you love, you really appreciate it when you get it back,” Brogan
said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200530/page/1/textview 2/2
