2020. 6. 18. UNEMPLOYMENT DIPS IN APRIL

UNEMPLOYMENT DIPS IN APRIL
Jobless rate at 13.3% after millions of workers recalled

Daily Press - 6 Jun 2020 - 1 By Christopher Rugaber Associated Press

Jobless rate at 13.3% after millions of Americans return to work, and pandemic shutdowns
ease.

WASHINGTON — U.S. unemployment dropped unexpectedly in May to 13.3% as reopened
businesses began recalling millions of workers faster than economists had predicted, trig-
gering a rally Friday on Wall Street and giving President Donald Trump something to boast
about amid his reelection bid.

The jobless rate is still on par with what the nation witnessed during the Great Depression.
And for the second straight month, the Labor Department acknowledged making errors in
counting the unemployed during the coronavirus outbreak, saying the real figure is worse
than the numbers indicate.

Still, after weeks of dire predictions by economists that unemployment in May could hit
20% or more, the news that the economy added a surprising 2.5 million jobs last month is
evidence that the employment collapse most likely bottomed out in April, when the rate
reached 14.7%.

Solid employment gains will probably continue through the end of the year, economists
expect, but the job market is in such a deep hole that it could take years to dig out. The U.S.
economy still has 20 million fewer jobs than it did in February. Oxford Economics, a con-
sulting firm, forecasts that 60% of jobs could be regained by the end of this year, leaving
unemployment in the 8%-to-10% range.

Most economists had expected rehiring to kick in this summer as shutdowns were increas-
ingly lifted and people gradually resumed shopping and eating out.

“The surprising thing here is the timing and that it happened as quickly as it did,” said
Adam Kamins, senior regional economist at Moody’s Analytics.

Economists warn that after an initial burst of hiring as businesses reopen, the recovery
could slow in the fall or early next year unless most Americans are confident they can
shop, travel, eat out and fully return to their other spending habits without fear of con-
tracting the virus.

“We are witnessing the easiest phase of growth as people come off temporary layoffs and
come back to their employers,” said Jason Furman, a Harvard economist and former top
adviser in the Obama White House. “And once employers are done recalling people, the
much harder, longer work of recovery will have to proceed.”

On Wall Street, the S & P 500 rose 81.58 points to 3,193.93 for its eighth gain in the last 10
days. The Dow Jones Industrial Average gained 829.16, or 3.2%, to 27,110.98, and the Nas-
dag composite rose 198.27, or 2.1%, to 9,814.08.

An exultant Trump seized on the report as evidence that the economy is going to come
back from the coronavirus crisis like a “rocket ship.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200606/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. UNEMPLOYMENT DIPS IN APRIL

“This shows that what we’ve been doing is right,” said the president, who has pushed
governors aggressively to reopen their economies amid warnings from public health offi-
cials that the country is risking a second wave of infections on top of the one that has killed

over 108,000 Americans.
Nearly all industries added jobs last month, a sharp reversal from April, when almost all

cut them.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200606/page/1/textview 2/2
