2020. 6. 18. Cops use Rush’s office as snackbar?

Cops use Rush’s office as snackbar?
Police accused of putting coffee, popcorn ahead of business looting

Daily Southtown - 12 Jun 2020 - 1 By Gregory Pratt, Jeremy Gorner, John Byrne, Annie Sweeney and Morgan Greene

Mayor Lori Lightfoot and U.S. Rep. Bobby Rush on Thursday showed images they said de-
picted Chicago police officers making popcorn, drinking coffee and sleeping on a couch in
the congressman’s campaign office while nearby businesses were being looted.

The mayor condemned the officers in strong terms and apologized to Rush on behalf of the
city.

Rush and Lightfoot joined police leaders to disclose the incident at an unusual City Hall
news conference where they said that looters went into Rush’s campaign office at 54th and
Wentworth on May 31 during widespread civil unrest in the wake of George Floyd’s killing
by Minneapolis police. Looters also sacked a nearby plaza of businesses, damaging local
stores and stealing merchandise.

Rush told reporters he got a call that his campaign offices had been burglarized and later
saw surveillance footage of officers “lounging in my office,” including three supervisors,
with their feet up on desks and another asleep on the couch.

“They even had the unmitigated gall to go and make coffee for themselves and to pop pop-
com, my popcorn, in my microwave while looters were tearing apart businesses within
their sight and within their reach,” Rush said.

A spokesman for Rush later said they learned about the building being burglarized on May
31, when the alarm system went off, but did not discover the police presence until two days
later when a security service provided video footage.

The police department declined to address questions about the timing of the incident or
say exactly when the officers were at Rush’s office.

Rush said he brought the matter to Lightfoot’s attention on Wednesday, which Lightfoot
said left her “enraged.” Lightfoot apologized to Rush

on behalf of the city for his office being treated “with such profound disrespect.”

“That’s a personal embarrassment to me,” Lightfoot said. “I’m sorry that you and your
staff even had to deal with this incredible indignity.”

As she spoke, Lightfoot played a slideshow of the police officers in Rush’s office while
pledging to hold them accountable for their actions.

“Not one of these officers will be allowed to hide behind the badge and go on and act like
nothing ever happened,” she said.

But Lightfoot notably stopped short of calling for the officers to be fired, saying only that
she supports the strongest possible action being taken against them. The mayor recently
called for an officer who flipped the middle finger at protesters to be fired, which some of
her allies considered to be ill-tempered and unlikely to happen.

Officials said they had not yet identified all the officers at the congressman’s office. A re-
quest for comment to the police union president was not immediately returned.

New police Superintendent David Brown condemned the officers at Rush’s office.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/2020061 2/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. Cops use Rush’s office as snackbar?

“This kind of conduct means that if you sleep during a riot, what do you do on a regular
shift when there’s no riot? What are you doing when there’s no crisis?” said Brown, who
was known for his clashes with the Dallas police union when he was that city’s chief.
“What makes you comfortable enough that supervisors won’t hold you accountable?”
First Deputy Superintendent Anthony Riccio, a longtime Chicago police official, also called
the officers’ conduct “absolutely indefensible.” At the same time the officers were popping
popcorn and napping, Riccio said, he was standing shoulder to shoulder with colleagues
downtown being pelted with rocks.

“They didn’t just let down the community,” Riccio said. “They let down fellow officers.”
Lightfoot used the news conference Thursday to wholeheartedly throw her support behind
the idea of pursuing some kind of state licensing for local police officers.

While the mayor has spoken favorably in recent days of perhaps certifying police the way
other professions are in Illinois, like nail salons, on Thursday she was all in.

“Now is the time to act on licensing for police officers once and for all,” Lightfoot said,
with Rush standing beside her, and the head of the Illinois Municipal League on hand as
well. “I’m here to tell you today that I’ve directed my legal team to do the research and to
draft the legislation. I am ready, I am ready to work with the governor and our other great
partners in Springfield to forge a change in state law to require licensing and certification
of police officers.”

Complicating matters is Lightfoot’s increasingly tense relationship with the Chicago Fra-
ternal Order of Police. Negotiations on a new police union contract are at a standstill, and
new FOP President John Catanzara has been roundly critical of the mayor’s leadership.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/2020061 2/page/1/textview 2/2
