2020. 6. 18. GOP slates challenger to Glasgow in Will Co.

GOP slates challenger to Glasgow in Will Co.
Rick Munoz running for state’s attorney in November election

Daily Southtown « 4 Jun 2020 - 1 - By Alicia Fabbre

A slate of Republican candidates, including one challenging five-term Will County State’s
Attorney James Glasgow, have filed to run for Will County offices in the November election
in races where no candidates ran in the March GOP primary.

 

Rick Munoz, 50, of Plainfield, leads the slate of candidates that filed Monday, challenging
Democrat Glasgow. He served as an assistant state’s attorney in Kane County for one year
before going into private practice.

Republicans Anthony Granata and James Buiter also filed with the slate. Granata, an inde-
pendent political consultant from Frankfort, is challenging incumbent Circuit Court Clerk
Andrea Lynn Chasteen. Granata has also worked professionally in the entertainment and
hospitality industry, and served eight year as a Frankfort Square Park District commis-
sioner.

Buiter, a CPA and financial adviser who serves as the Crete Township clerk, is challenging
incumbent Auditor Kevin “Duffy” Blackburn in the November election.

Munoz said he decided to run because he did not feel Glasgow was representing Will
County residents, particularly as it related to Gov. J.B. Pritzker’s stay-athome order, which
Munoz argues was done illegally.

“He’s not going to stand up for people’s rights; he put party over people’s rights,” Munoz
said.

Both Munoz and Will County Republican Central Committee Chair George Pearson argued
Glasgow does not regularly prosecute cases.

“He doesn’t go to court,” Pearson said. “He’s just a figurehead.”

Glasgow said in a statement his work goes beyond courtroom trials. He pointed to creation
of the Children’s Advocacy Center, which assists in cases involving abuse against children,
the creation of problem solving courts, such as drug court, and the four residential facili-
ties that help those in those various court programs.

He also noted etablishing the League of Extraordinary Canines & Friends to address issues
of animal cruelty.

“For decades, I have ensured that those who commit criminal acts are brought to justice
and at the same time have implemented creative initiatives to help those among us who
are the most vulnerable,” he said.

Some Democrats have raised questions over Munoz’s eligibility to run as a Republican be-
cause he voted as a Democrat in the March primary. Voting records from the Will County
clerk’s office show that while Munoz pulled a Democrat ballot in the March primary, he
has taken Republican ballots in the 2002 and 2004 primaries. Pearson said Munoz was part

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200604/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. GOP slates challenger to Glasgow in Will Co.

of a slate of three GOP candidates unanimously approved by the Will County Republican
Party officials.

No objections had been filed as of Tuesday against the Republican slate, though the dead-
line to file objections is Monday. If there is a challenge, the DuPage County state’s attor-
ney’s office will review the matter.

Glasgow’s office requested a special prosecutor arguing the county clerk “anticipates
seeking an opinion” on issues related to petitions. Will County Chief Judge Richard
Schoenstedt granted the motion and appointed the DuPage County state’s attorney’s of-
fice.

“This was an issue driven by the state’s attorney’s office,” said Charles Pelkie, chief of
staff for Will County Clerk Lauren Staley

Ferry. “If an issue did arise, the state’s attorney would have a conflict, but there is no issue
before us today.”

During his tenure, Glasgow delivered arguments and led the prosecution of Drew Peterson,
who was sentenced to 38 years for the death of his third wife, Kathleen Savio, and an addi-
tional 40 years in prison for attempting to hire someone to kill Glasgow.

Glasgow also led the prosecution of Adam Landerman, who was one of four people charged
in Joliet’s Hickory Street murders. Landerman and two others were sentenced to life in
prison. A fourth person charged in the case accepted a plea deal in exchange for her testi-
mony against her co-defendants.

Alicia Fabbre is a freelance reporter for the Daily Southtown.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200604/page/1/textview 2/2
