2020. 6. 18. Pandemic presents new obstacles for funeral home

Pandemic presents new obstacles for funeral home

Leak & Sons says, a South Side institution, has had to adjust how they help
families

Daily Southtown - 27 May 2020 - 1 - By Corilyn Shropshire

The coronavirus pandemic is forcing Chicago-area companies and workers to face harsh
realities about their paychecks and their place in the local economy. The Tribune is reach-
ing out to hear, and share, their stories.

ae

 

   

   

 

Leak & Sons Funeral Homes, started 87 years ago, has helped families bury police officers,
homicide victims and singer Sam Cooke.

The coronavirus pandemic has forced the South Side institution to grapple with something
altogether different.

“It seemed like after that first death ... and Gov. (J.B.) Pritzker’s stay-at-home order,
everything just changed,” Vice President Spencer Leak Jr. said.

The pace of retrieving bodies, preparing them and conducting services surged almost
overnight. Refrigerator space had to be expanded at its location in the Chatham neighbor-
hood. Extra staff had to be hired to work behind the scenes and to assist families. Personal
protective equipment had to be purchased and some employees transitioned to working
from home.

With so many calls coming in daily, some families became frustrated by delays, Leak said.
“They may or may not understand that you had three calls before and now you’re late get-
ting to their home,” he said. “It’s understandable they are upset.”

Also changed are long-standing funeral traditions. At its Country Club Hills location, an
area offered to families for gatherings after a service has been converted to a chapel for fu-
nerals that normally would be at a church. Gatherings are no longer an option, since only
10 people at a time are allowed at viewings and services, all while observing strict social
distancing protocols, he said.

To manage this, viewings and funerals are spaced out to prevent having too many people
in the buildings, and Leak has hired security guards and another scheduler to plan for the

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200527/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. Pandemic presents new obstacles for funeral home

flow of mourners.

“Everything that was done before is still done,” he said. “Our families are saying they
won’t allow this pandemic to toss their loved one away. It makes them want to honor the
dead more.”

Leak, the third generation in the familyowned business, prides himself on the compassion
he shows during the process, taking family members by the arm, perhaps telling them a
joke as they walk through the door to make funeral arrangements, pulling out their chair
as they sit down in his office. He can’t do that anymore since they have to remain 6 feet
apart. He used to walk older mourners to their cars. Now he says goodbye at the door.

“T’m apologizing to them for having to put them through this and instead of shaking their
hands, I’m wondering if I’m too close to them,” he said. “It just doesn’t feel good.”

The virus’s impact is visible on the funeral homes’ woodwork and fixtures, which aren’t as
elegant as they were earlier this year, he said, as they have to be constantly sanitized
throughout the day. The pulpit and microphone have to be wiped and sprayed, as do the
pews, chairs, tables, and door handles. When he gets home at night, Leak said his wife
sprays him down with Lysol. He showers and is

allowed to sit on one seat in the kitchen.

Meanwhile his staff, he said, hasn’t skipped a beat, even though employees had the option
to step away from the business to ensure their personal safety. “I’m so proud of my em-
ployees for saying they wanted to continue to work,” he said. Leak said what Leak & Sons is
experiencing isn’t unique — mortuaries throughout the city are going through the same
thing.

‘“‘We’re no greater than the other funeral home down the street,” he said. “I’m sure all of
us are swamped.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200527/page/1/textview 2/2
