2020. 6. 18. MASKS SOON TO BE REQUIRED IN PUBLIC SPACES

MASKS SOON TO BE REQUIRED IN PUBLIC SPACES

Northam: Starting Friday, everyone over age 10 will be required to wear fa-
cial coverings

Daily Press - 27 May 2020 - 1 - By Marie Albiges Staff writer

Everyone over age 10 will be required to wear face masks starting Friday inside public spa-
ces in Virginia, an effort to prevent the spread of the coronavirus, Gov. Ralph Northam said
Tuesday.

 

As the state inches toward the second phase of reopening, Northam said people should
wear masks “anywhere people can congregate” inside. That means brickand-mortar retail
spaces, restaurants, personal care and grooming salons, government buildings and on
public transportation.

“T am taking this step because science increasingly shows us that the virus spreads less
easily when everyone is wearing face coverings,” he said at a press conference in Rich-
mond.

The announcement Tuesday comes after the Democratic governor was seen over the week-
end greeting people along Virginia Beach’s Oceanfront and taking selfies without a mask,
drawing criticism on social media. He said he left his mask in the car, and takes “full re-
sponsibility” for his lack of preparedness. He said he wasn’t there “with the intention of
being involved with the public,” but was there to speak with Virginia Beach Mayor Bobby
Dyer

and reporters.

“People held me accountable and I appreciate that,” he said.

Northam said the mask requirement won’t be enforced by police or sheriff ’s deputies, but
by Virginia health department officials. He wouldn’t elaborate when pressed by a reporter
on what authority state health officials had, but the governor said he wanted to avoid hav-
ing people threatened with jail time. Violating an emergency executive order is a class 1
misdemeanor, punishable by up to a year in jail and a $2,500 fine.

“T’m not sure we need to get into specifics of what authority, at this stage,” Northam said,
adding someone with concerns about someone not wearing a mask can call the Virginia
Department of Health.

Northam’s chief of staff, Clark Mercer, said the requirement was aimed at businesses that
are “grossly negligent” in not enforcing the mask rules.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200527/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 18. MASKS SOON TO BE REQUIRED IN PUBLIC SPACES

“The criminal code is not the place you want this enforced, there are tremendous equity
issues with enforcing this that we’re cognizant of,” Mercer said.

Northam hinted that the General Assembly, which is expected to meet later this year to
amend the state’s budget, could change the state code to make it a civil offense, carrying a
fine and no jail time, to not wear a mask during a health emergency.

People exercising, eating or drinking won’t be required to wear a mask. Anyone who has
trouble breathing with a mask on or who has a health condition that prevents them from
having a mask on also won’t have to.

Northam, a doctor himself, said he strongly recommends children between the ages of 3
and 10 also wear a mask.

The masks don’t have to be medical grade, he said.

“T’m not looking for people to get in trouble by not wearing a mask, but I am looking for
people to please do the right thing. I’m asking for people to respect one another,” he said,
adding he was “really optimistic” that Virginians would comply.

Northam said the state Department of Labor and Industry is also developing new work-
place emergency safety standards around masks.

Republicans rebuffed the mask mandate, calling it executive overreach coming from a
hypocritical, inconsistent governor who didn’t wear a mask this weekend in Virginia
Beach.

“Requiring Virginia’s businesses to enforce this mandate under threat of action by the
Department of Health only adds to the incredible and stifling burdens placed upon them by
the Democrat majority and the governor this year,” Senate minority leaders said ina
statement.

Friday, the first day masks will be mandatory, also marks two weeks of most of the state
being in the first part of Northam’s threephased reopening plan, which allowed restau-
rants to open with 50% capacity in their outdoor seating areas, and allowed retail stores to
open with 50% capacity. Following Centers for Disease Control recommendations, the
governor has said he wants to continue seeing two weeks of decline in both coronavirus
hospitalization rates and the percentage of positive cases before Virginia moves into Phase
2.

But he said Tuesday it’s too soon to tell when the move into Phase 2 would occur.

“The incubation period of this virus is lengthy enough that we really just don’t have the
data, we don’t have the trends we’re comfortable with,” he said.

The state has reported 39,342 confirmed or probable coronavirus cases, with 1,236 deaths
and 4,325 hospitalizations. The percentage of positive tests has declined or remained the
same since the end of April.

The governor previously said Phase 2 will limit gatherings to 50 people while continuing to
encourage social distancing and the wearing of masks in public. Vulnerable populations
should still stay home.

State law prohibits people from wearing a mask to conceal themselves in public, but
Northam has said no one would be stopped by police during the pandemic. The law makes
an exception for people wearing protective masks necessary for the “physical safety of the
wearer or other persons,” or on the advice of a licensed physician.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200527/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 18. MASKS SOON TO BE REQUIRED IN PUBLIC SPACES

The CDC recommends wearing cloth face coverings in public, especially in areas like gro-
cery stores and pharmacies, where staying at least 6 feet from others can be difficult. State
health officials have said the virus can be transmitted by talking, coughing or sneezing,
and people who have the coronavirus but don’t have symptoms can spread it.

Maryland’s governor, with whom Northam has been conferring closely throughout the
pandemic, made wearing masks in public mandatory more than a month ago.

Marie Albiges, 757-247-4962, malbiges@dailypress.com

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200527/page/1/textview 3/3
