2020. 6. 18. ‘HE ALWAYS MADE THEM FEEL LIKE THE PRINCE’

‘HE ALWAYS MADE THEM FEEL LIKE THE PRINCE’
Kurt Rosenbach, retired CEO of the Rices Nachmans stores, dies at 97

Daily Press - 9 Jun 2020: 1+ By Kimberly Pierceall Staff writer

NORFOLK — It’s difficult to imagine a downtown Norfolk that wasn’t teeming with people
living and working and walking among restaurants, shops and parks (that is, before a pan-
demic set in) but it wasn’t always that way.

Re

i*4

Kurt Rosenbach, though, once saw past the present to a future that few could imagine. It’s
what visionaries do.

The retired CEO of the Rices Nachmans department store chain was among those instru-
mental in ensuring Norfolk would again become a destination, just one in a lengthy list of
contributions of time and talent dedicated to improving the place that became home.

On Saturday, the day after his 97th birthday, Rosenbach died, leaving a legacy that in-
cluded starting the Downtown Norfolk Council and the Ohef Sholom Temple Foundation,
as well as chairing the United Way of South Hampton

Roads, serving as president of the temple and helping direct the Norfolk Foundation and
United Jewish Federation.

“He was tireless in working for the things he believed in,” said Rabbi Rosalin Mandelberg.
Among his efforts, Rosenbach set up an endowment for the temple 20 years ago to ensure
it was on solid financial footing in perpetuity. At the temple, there’s an award in his name.
“People just adored him,” she said. “I would have loved to have had him forever.”

Paul Fraim, former mayor of Norfolk, called him a dear friend who was among the “early
cast of founding fathers that worked hard to get things going here.”

“He believed in Norfolk at a time when not many people did,” he said.

It was the late 1970s and early 1980s, when storefronts were shut, the waterfront Town
Point Park was a parking lot and people couldn’t live downtown because of an ordinance
barring it — and few people would have chosen that anyway.

“He helped give them a reason to,” said Fraim of Rosenbach’s involvement in turning
downtown Norfolk into a destination for living in and visiting.

He was a longtime resident of downtown Norfolk, too, living in the Harbour View condo-
miniums, even calling Fraim on occasion to tell him about the trees that needed attention,
the former mayor said, chuckling at the memory.

Born in Germany, he fled the country with his parents as Nazi control deepened, arriving
in Baltimore in 1938 as a teenager. After earning an accounting degree and becoming a cer-
tified public accountant, he was recruited in 1955 by the department store chain in Norfolk
that would eventually merge with another to become Rices Nachmans. It was a golden age
for downtown department stores, and Rosenbach rose through the ranks to CEO. In 1985,

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200609/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. ‘HE ALWAYS MADE THEM FEEL LIKE THE PRINCE’

all eight Rices Nachmans were sold to the Hess’s chain. Rosenbach retired, but not for
long.

He joined friend Leonard Strelitz at his family’s Virginia Beach business, Haynes Furni-
ture. His official title when he retired in 2008 may have been senior vice president, but
“Kurt was Kurt,” said David Brand, who was an executive at Haynes alongside Rosenbach.
“Kurt was the white-haired senior statesman,” Brand said. “He was as brilliant as he was
dapper. He was as serious as he was funny.” He was the man Brand and others would go to
with an issue, professional or otherwise. Undoubtedly, when they did, he would have his
impeccable legal pad as well as a desk drawer filled with gum to offer.

“He had a very keen sense of what was right and wrong, and what was doable and was not
doable,” Brand said, noting that no one in the company would have ever wanted to go to
Rosenbach with an idea “that wasn’t quite square.”

Brand said Rosenbach was also able to have a conversation as easily with a furniture sales-
person or delivery driver as he was a banker or company president. At store openings, he
would sometimes bring a screwdriver or a hammer to help with last minute fixes. He was
in the trenches, Brand said.

“He never made someone feel like the pauper,” he said. “He always made them feel like
the prince.”

Brand said he told Rosenbach’s wife, Rose, that if it weren’t for the coronavirus pandemic,
“that temple would have been absolutely standing-room only” with friends and family
paying their respects.

Rosenbach is survived by Rose, his wife of 67 years, two daughters — Carolyn Perlman and
Marcy Terkeltaub — and son Murray Rosenbach, who joked during a service broadcast on
the temple’s Facebook page that his father had “always called me your number one son.”
“All of us are so glad you are at peace,” he said.

Jamie Rosenbach, one of nine grandchildren, said during a later eulogy: “Just try not to
work so hard up there.”

“We all joked before, that going out to eat with Pop Pop was like going out to eat with the
mayor of Norfolk or the mayor of Tidewater,” she said, noting the number of people who
would come up to say hello.

In the past couple of weeks, the family had visited him at the hospital, including this past
Friday when they celebrated his 97th birthday together. Rose, whom they call Meema,
hadn’t wanted him to leave the world on that day, Jamie Rosenbach said. Instead, he
waited until just past midnight.

“It was just like he said, ‘Meema makes the rules,’” she said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200609/page/1/textview 2/2
