2020. 6. 18. Wilson says she’s in ‘best possible shape’

Wilson says she’s in ‘best possible shape’

Daily Southtown - 5 Jun 2020 - 1 - By Tony Baranek

Joliet Catholic outside hitter and San Diego recruit Emily Wilson is ready to meet high ex-
pectations as she preps for her senior season.

Expectations are high at Joliet Catholic — and beyond — as Emily Wilson heads into her
senior season.

VolleyballMag.com does a list of the top 25 underclassmen in the nation and then the next
13 in preparation for announcing its senior Fab 50.

Wilson, a 6-foot-3 outside hitter, made the next 13.

Joliet Catholic coach Chris Scheibe can list the reasons why.

“She’s a dominating player on the court with an all-around game,” Scheibe said. “She
passes so well, she can hit so well, she can block so well. She is a real differencemaker
when she’s out there.”

Recognition is nice.

“Oh, it feels great,” Wilson said. “It’s just like all of my hard work is paying off. It’s amaz-
ing to know that with everything I’ve gone through, it’s getting noticed. I’m really grateful
for it.”

Being out there has been a problem the past two seasons for Wilson, who’s had a variety of
injuries. None have been careerthreatening, but together have kept her off the court.

The San Diego recruit has different plans for the 2020 season.

“T’m probably in my best shape possible,” Wilson said. “I’m really focused on getting back
stronger than ever, so there are no more problems. I have a gym in my house and I’m in it
every day. I’m working super hard to make a really good comeback.”

Wilson burst onto the Southland scene as a freshman, putting down 228 kills with 32
blocks. She was part of a1-2 hitting punch with Emily Holbrook as the Angels won 28
matches, their most since 2012.

In and out of the lineup during her sophomore and junior seasons, Wilson compiled 177
kills and 236 digs.

“It was frustrating,” Wilson said. “It wasn’t as hard physically as it was mentally. But I feel
like these things made me stronger.

“It definitely has improved my work ethic. I feel like I’ve become a better player. Eventu-
ally, I’m kind of thankful for it.” When she is on the floor, it’s noticeable. “You can just see
a change in the girls with her out there,” Scheibe said. “We were like, ‘OK, we can still do
this because she’s back.’

Emily likes to work. Because of all these injuries I don’t think she has seen her full poten-
tial of what she can be yet. I think she is going to continue to get better and improve.”
Book it: Shepard libero Leah Bylut has four program records to either improve on or add to
going into her senior season.

If they kept track of her minutes, she might even have a fifth.

“Leah hasn’t really come off the court in three years,” Astros coach Brian Zofkie said. “She
has had ample opportunity to break all of those records.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200605/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. Wilson says she’s in ‘best possible shape’

And made the most of them.

Bylut holds program career highs with 1,090 digs and 174 aces, the single-season record
with 442 digs and single-match mark in digs with 33.

She was first team all-area last season, earning all-tournament honors at Joliet Central,
Oak Lawn, Rich East and Bradley.

This spring, Bylut committed to Ferris State.

“Obviously, I gave them glowing recommendations about her,” Zofkie said. “Those
coaches had her up for a visit and fell in love with her, too. She’s going to study pharmacy,
so it’s a really good fit for her there.”

Bylut isn’t necessarily the flashiest player on the court. She has great range but often
doesn’t need to use it, according to Zofkie.

“She’s not a cocky kid but she’s very confident and that confidence comes from hard work
and preparation,” Zofkie said. “She always puts herself in the right position.

“T’ve had a couple of other liberos go on and play at the Division I level. They were great
players and made spectacular plays. But they weren’t always in the right spot so they had
to. Leah makes everything look how it’s supposed to because she’s always in the right spot.
“She is one of a kind.”

Did you know? Sandburg’s Sarah Kwasigroch is IHSA’s all-time single season and career
assists leader.

Kwasigroch, a 5-foot-10 setter, had 3,659 assists during her career from 2001 to 2004. She
set the single-season assist record with 1,204 in 2001. She played in college at New Mexico.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200605/page/1/textview 2/2
