2020. 6. 18. And here's the gist on Lewis’ Marty Jepsen

And here’s the gist on Lewis’ Marty Jepsen

Lewis coach Friend said ‘we’ll play it by ear,’ positioning the Marist gradu-
ate for success

Daily Southtown - 2 Jun 2020 - 1 - By Tony Baranek

      
 

Flyers coach locks in Marist grad with open mind, positioning him for success.
— LI cei F =a * 7. = =

=

fi

EF COC eee f So a
During the recruiting process, Marist’s Marty Jepsen heard a lot of things from a lot of
men’s volleyball coaches.

“Some wanted me to hit,” Jepsen said. “Some saw me as a libero or a defensive specialist.”
Lewis coach Dan Friend won over Jepsen with the best recruiting pitch of all.

“He had a really open mind,” Jepsen said. “He told me, ‘You’ re just a good volleyball
player. That’s what we see in you. Whether you’re going to hit or play libero for us, we’ ll
play it by ear.’”

If you had asked me at the end of his senior year in 2019 what Jepsen’s college position
would be, I’d have looked you in the eyes and said, “Wherever he wants.”

Truth be told, though, the 6-foot-1 Jepsen knew at his height, he wouldn’t dominate at
outside hitter in college as he did in high school.

“Before I was even talking to colleges, I knew I was undersized,” Jepsen said. “I knew the
transition going from hitter to libero in college was pretty common.”

Jepsen made the switch. Before his freshman season at Lewis was cut short by the coron-
avirus pandemic, he was making a defensive difference.

In 16 matches, Jepsen had 77 digs. His single-game highs of 11 came in back-toback
matches against George Mason and McKendree.

“T loved playing libero,” Jepsen said. “I thought it was a good change. I’d been hitting all of
my life, but I’ve always loved defense, and passing is one of the most important parts of
the game.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200602/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. And here's the gist on Lewis’ Marty Jepsen

“Tt was a challenge I tried to embrace as much as possible.”

Jepsen was the Daily Southtown Boys

Volleyball Player of the Year in 2018 and 2019.

I covered a lot of boys volleyball in 2019 and got to know Jepsen pretty well. He’s one of the
most personable athletes I have ever had the pleasure to write about.

I can remember one time at a tournament looking to interview him and asking somebody
where he was. The answer was something like, “The last time I saw him he was out in the
lobby talking with some fans.”

My favorite quote about him that season came from Minooka coach Mike Kargle.
“Honestly, I’m more impressed with that young man off the court than I am on the court,”
Kargle said. “I saw him walking around the building picking things up that people dropped.
Holding doors open for them and saying, ‘please’ and ‘thank you,’ and ‘yes, sir’ and ‘no,
ma’am.’

“He seems like a guy I’d like to have on my team.”

Friend very much agrees with that assessment.

“It’s why we recruited him,” Friend said. “You know, ultimately, talent is important. But
another big piece for us a lot of times is just the type of individual a student-athlete is. He
certainly is a special one.

“You can’t pass up on it when you find a very talented kid with a great personality who
comes from a good South Side family.”

Jepsen said one of the high points at Lewis came during his second match. He looked into
the stands and saw Marist coach Jordan Vidovic along with several of his teammates and
friends.

“T was insanely grateful,” Jepsen said. “That’s one of the great things about the Marist
program. It’s not just a four-year thing. It’s a lifetime commitment of support.

“Tt was definitely weird being on the court and him not talking to me or the team. I was
able to learn so much under him for four years. Now I’m with coach Friend, who is another
fantastic coach.

“T consider myself super lucky.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200602/page/1/textview 2/2
