2020. 6. 18. PROPOSED RAMP SALE IRKS BOATERS

PROPOSED RAMP SALE IRKS BOATERS

Yacht company’s interest in Sunset Creek Boat Ramp could place its free
access status in limbo

Daily Press - 9 Jun 2020 - 1 - By Lisa Vernon Sparks Staff writer

HAMPTON — Close to restaurants, a marina and offering easy access to the Hampton River
and the Chesapeake Bay, Sunset Creek Boat Ramp draws recreational sailors from
Hampton Roads and beyond. _

   
 

“It’s a two-minute drive from the Hampton RV and Boat Storage,”

says John Earle, of Northern Virginia, who has ventured down for some 13 years. “It’s local
to everything ... and the most centralized boat ramp. The awesome thing about it is, it’s so
close to some prime fishing areas in Hampton.”

Owners of Bluewater Yacht L.C., a yacht brokerage and service company right next door
think it’s awesome too — and want to purchase the city-owned ramp, which could place
its free access in limbo. As part of a plan to expand, the company submitted a proposal to
acquire the property at assessed value, including the ramp, located at 21 Marina Road, plus
two small parking lots, at 90 and 92 Marina Road.

Hampton has owned the ramp since 1957, according to city tax records. The boat ramp is
assessed at $395,000, according to city records. Two vacant lots at 90 and 92 Marina Road
are assessed at $53,100 and $88,500, respectively.

Details of the pending sale still are being hammered out, but the Hampton City Council will
weigh in on the matter Wednesday.

Hampton -based Bluewater, which also has sites in Maryland, North Carolina and Florida,
plans to expand its operations, add 55-80 new employees, clean up, remove pilings and
sunken boats in Sunset Creek and install new bulkheads and piers.

On its existing site, the company plans to install a mobile lift weighing at least 150 tons
that will enable the business to service or park larger vessels. The company also proposes
building a privacy fence around sides of the lot.

For the past couple weeks,

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200609/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 18. PROPOSED RAMP SALE IRKS BOATERS

word of the proposed sale spread quickly on social media — with most comments a
staunch thumbs down.

A week earlier at the Hampton Planning Commission meeting held at City Hall — with
some members participating via Zoom — residents made their opinions clear with some
42 emails sent to city planners, and a few people who aired complaints in person.

Several boat owners in general said they don’t want the ramp to be privatized.

“It affects a lot of people. The public needs more of a chance to participate and provide in-
put,” says Claire Neubert. “I just found out about this plan this week. Most people I’ve
talked to have been surprised.”

Larry Cummings, a lawyer representing the company, said owners gave a presentation
with some neighbors, in which they proposed leasing the property back to the city for
roughly a year and a half, until an alternative can surface.

“There are a lot of things wrong with this boat ramp,” Cummings said. “What they would
like to do is to provide money to the city by purchas(ing) the property so that money can be
utilized to replace this with a good and appropriate boat ramp. We want to be part of this
solution. We do not want to be part of the problem, and we understand the objections. And
we wholeheartedly support the need for an improved appropriate boat ramp.”

The commissioners postponed a vote until their next meeting to recommend rezoning the
vacant lots, necessary for Bluewater to do business on those parcels.

“One reason is because we wanted to make sure all the speakers were heard (before a
vote),” said planning commission vice chairman Chris Carter. “Also, we were flooded with
emails about an hour before the meeting. There was no one in favor. The city didn’t do
their due diligence to promote it — they did it kind of back door.”

Councilman Billy Hobbs praised the company’s owners, but said there are too many un-
knowns to proceed now.

“We need to take time out and make sure we are serving everyone,” Hobbs said. “We have
not done a deep dive and with everything else going on right now. I’m not saying it’s bad
plan ... but there is a lot (of ) work to consider.”

Carter added that the city should have had a better plan, perhaps with a condition of the
sale to the public access — forever.

As an alternative, city officials have proposed the boat ramp at Old Point Comfort Marina,
which is managed by the Fort Monroe Authority. The marina is among several properties
at the former military post that are being offered up for lease.

There is a small fee to rent a slip at the marina, Fort Monroe officials said.

“It’s much farther for somebody who doesn’t want to fish on the other side of the HRBT
(Hampton Roads Bridge-Tunnel),” said Jack Bartell, who rents a slip at Salt Ponds. “The
parking is difficult. It’s gravelly. It’s not the nicest. I don’t know why they would allowa
corporation to take over a facility that serves so many.”

Farther north in Fox Hill, on Dandy Point Road, is another public access boat ramp near
Wallace’s Bait and Tackle. But that’s a bit of a hike, says boater Stephen Harvey.

“Very disappointed,” Harvey, who readied to launch his Shamrock-style boat, said.
“That’s (Wallace’s) a... good half an hour to get back down here. I mean, you can go across

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200609/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 18. PROPOSED RAMP SALE IRKS BOATERS

the Willoughby (Spit), but you’re gonna have to haul your boat through the tunnel. This is
very inconvenient. I mean, plus this place is always packed.”

“The best alternative in my mind would be to build another boat ramp for the public to use

— if we decide to sell it,”” Hobbs said. “When you do more boat work down there, the
neighbors from Sunset Creek will be affected.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200609/page/1/textview 3/3
