2020. 6. 18. Floyd’s brother to House: ‘Stop the pain’

Floyd’s brother to House: ‘Stop the pain’
Floyd’s brother implores legislators to act on policing

Daily Southtown - 11 Jun 2020 - 1 By Lisa Mascaro and Andrew Taylor

Philonise Floyd pressed lawmakers considering an overhaul of law enforcement to act so
his brother George won’t be just “another name.”

   

WASHINGTON — Philonise Floyd challenged Congress on Wednesday to “stop the pain”
as lawmakers consider a sweeping law enforcement overhaul, so his brother George won’t
be just “another name” on a growing list of black Americans killed during interactions
with police.

Floyd’s appearance before a House hearing came a day after funeral services for George
Floyd, the 46year-old Minnesota man whose death has become a worldwide symbol in
demonstrations over calls for changes to police practices and an end to racial prejudices.
“T’m here today to ask you to make it stop. Stop the pain,” Philonise Floyd told the si-
lenced hearing room.

Choking back tears, he said he wants to make sure that his brother, whom he called
“Perry,” is “more than another face on a T-shirt, more than another name on a list that
won’t stop growing.”

Floyd challenged lawmakers, “Be the leaders that this country, this world, needs. Do the
right thing.”

House Judiciary Committee Chairman Jerry Nadler gaveled in the session as Democrats re-
view the Justice in Policing Act, a far-ranging package of proposals amid a national debate
on policing and racial inequity.

Lawmakers also heard testimony from civil rights and law enforcement leaders as
Congress considers the changes to police practices and accountability after Floyd’s death
in police custody and the mass protests that followed.

“Today we answer their call,” Nadler said.

House Speaker Nancy Pelosi watched from the hearing audience, and the House GOP
leader, Kevin McCarthy, also joined.

Republicans are criticizing activists who want to “defund the police” — a catch-all term
for shifting law enforcement resources — though the Democratic bill does not call for that.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/2020061 1/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 18. Floyd’s brother to House: ‘Stop the pain’

President Donald Trump and allies have seized on the phrase to portray Democrats as ex-
treme as GOP lawmakers rush to come up with their own proposals.

“The American people understand that it’s time for a real discussion,” said Rep. Jim Jordan
of Ohio, the ranking Republican on the panel. But he said what they also understand is that
“it is pure insanity to defund the police.”

For hours, witnesses described what one called a “lynching” over what happened to Floyd
on May 25, and others placed his death alongside those of other African Americans that
have created a tally becoming difficult for lawmakers in Congress to ignore.

Rep. Karen Bass, D-Calif., chairwoman of the Congressional Black Caucus, which is leading
the legislative effort, said the proposed changes reflect a nation coming to grips witha
history of racial injustice.

“This is about the kind of America we all want to see,” Bass said.

The Democrats’ legislation would create a national database of police misconduct, ban po-
lice chokeholds and loosen “qualified immunity” to make it easier for those injured to seek
damages in lawsuits, among other changes.

The proposals don’t go as far as some activists want to defund police departments for
other community services. They do, however, make available grant money for states to
reimagine ways of policing.

Republicans as well as Democrats have called for a national registry of use-offorce inci-
dents, so police officers cannot transfer between departments without public awareness of
their records.

Rep. James Sensenbrenner, R-Wis., said the “depravity” he said he saw in the video of
Floyd’s death “burned in my soul.” He welcomed a new database and also called for police
chiefs to get rid of

“bad apples.”

There is also growing bipartisan support for increasing the use of police body cameras,
ending noknock warrants as police used to enter the home of Breonna Taylor, who was
killed in Louisville, Kentucky, and other changes to police practices and oversight.

White House press secretary Kayleigh McEnany said Wednesday that Trump was still look-
ing at different options. She said the administration was making “final edits” on a pro-
posal for release “in the coming days.”

Philonise Floyd’s testimony captivated the room as he recounted what he saw in the widely
viewed video as an officer pressed a knee into George Floyd’s neck while other police stood
by. The one officer, Derek Chauvin, is now charged with murder, and three others also face
charges.

“His life mattered,” the brother said. He broke down at one point over the images. At an-
other, he said he wonders every day if he will be “next.”

“They lynched my brother,” he said.

Asked if he could think of any reason for the incident, Philonise Floyd told Nadler his
brother and Chauvin both worked at the same place.

“T think it was personal,” Philonise Floyd testified.

Minnesota Attorney General Keith Ellison said Wednesday that investigators are looking
into a report from CBS News that the men had “bumped heads” working at El Nuevo Rodeo

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/2020061 1/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 18. Floyd’s brother to House: ‘Stop the pain’

nightclub in Minneapolis.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/2020061 1/page/1/textview 3/3
