2020. 6. 18. Defense secretary calls a reverse on Pentagon troop plan

Defense secretary calls a reverse on Pentagon troop plan

Defense secretary orders soldiers to stay in DC region

Daily Southtown « 4 Jun 2020 - 1 - By Zeke Miller and Robert Burns

In an abrupt reversal, Defense Secretary Mark Esper on Wednesday overturned an earlier
Pentagon decision to send active-duty soldiers home amid growing tensions over the re-
sponse to protests.

| | 1 tt

   

 

i penis Pe

WASHINGTON — In an abrupt reversal, Defense Secretary Mark Esper on Wednesday
overturned an earlier Pentagon decision to send a couple hundred active-duty soldiers
home from the Washington, D.C., region, amid growing tensions with the White House
over the military response to the protests.

Army Secretary Ryan McCarthy said the reversal came after Esper attended a meeting at
the White House, and after other internal Pentagon discussions.

It is unclear if Esper met with President Donald Trump. McCarthy said he believes the
change was based on ensuring there is enough military support in the region to respond to
any protest problems if needed.

McCarthy said he received notice of the Pentagon order to send about 200 soldiers with the
82nd Airborne’s immediate response force home Wednesday morning.

Hours later, the Pentagon notified him that Esper had reversed the decision.

The move to keep the troops in the region, however, comes as Pentagon leaders continue
to insist they do not want to use activeduty forces to help quell the protests.

Earlier in the day, Esper declared he opposes using military troops for law enforcement in
containing current street protests, tamping down threats from Trump, who had warned
states he was willing to send soldiers to “dominate” their streets.

Less than 48 hours after Trump threatened to use the Insurrection Act to contain protests
if governors were not able to get a handle on unrest, Esper said the 1807 law should be in-
voked in the country “only in the most urgent and dire of situations.”

He added, “We are not in one of those situations now.”

At Trump’s encouragement, Esper had ordered about 1,300 Army personnel to military
bases just outside the nation’s capital.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200604/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 18. Defense secretary calls a reverse on Pentagon troop plan

The reversal added to confusion over Trump’s threat to invoke the Insurrection Act for
protests following the death of George Floyd in Minneapolis. White House officials had in-
dicated even before Esper’s comments that Trump was backing away from invoking the
act, though officials said Trump was upset that Esper’s statement conveyed “weakness.”
Press secretary Kayleigh McEnany said Trump was still willing to deploy federal troops de-
spite Esper’s comments.

“If needed, he will use it,” she told reporters. “But at this time he’s relying on surging the
streets with

National Guard. It’s worked with great effect.”

At the same time, the president was taking credit for the deployment of federal and other
law enforcement officers to the nation’s capital, saying it offered a model to states on how
to stop violence accompanying some protests nationwide.

Trump argued the show of force was responsible for protests in Washington and other
cities turning more calm in recent days and repeated his criticism of governors who have
not deployed their National Guard to the fullest.

“You have to have a dominant force,” Trump told Fox

New Radio.

Underscoring his criticism, McEnany said, “The weak-kneed policies of New York stand in
stark contrast to the law and order policies of this president.”

Esper has come under fire from critics, including retired senior military officers, for hav-
ing walked from the White House on Monday evening with Trump and others for a presi-
dential photo opportunity in front of St. John’s Episcopal Church, which had previously
sustained damage from protesters.

The White House laid responsibility for Monday’s events in Lafayette Park on Attorney
General William

Barr, saying he gave the order to clear out the protest before Trump’s walk to the church
ahead of Washington’s 7 p.m. curfew.

The White House also said Trump’s visit to the church where he held up a Bible was a
“leadership moment” akin to Winston Churchill’s inspection of bomb-damaged London
during World War II.

But Erik Larson, author of “The Splendid and the Vile: A Saga of Churchill, Family, and De-
fiance During the Blitz,” said he was disgusted by the comparison.

“The comparison is worse than merely laughable; it verges on obscenity,” Larson tweeted.
“Churchill wept when he visited bombed neighborhoods; he offered compassion and hope,
and helped people find their courage.”

Meanwhile, former Defense Secretary Jim Mattis denounced Trump’s heavyhanded use of
force to quell protests near the White House and said his former boss was setting up a
“false conflict” between the military and civilian society.

“T have watched this week’s unfolding events, angry and appalled,” Mattis wrote in a
statement published by The Atlantic.

Mattis has generally kept a low profile since retiring as defense secretary in December 2018
to protest Trump’s Syria policy.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200604/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 18. Defense secretary calls a reverse on Pentagon troop plan

Mattis said he never dreamed troops “would be ordered under any circumstance to violate
the Constitutional rights of their fellow citizens — much less to provide a bizarre photo op
for the elected commanderin-chief, with military leadership standing alongside.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200604/page/1/textview 3/3
