2020. 6. 18. 2 new relief funds step up to support Southland nonprofits

2 new relief funds step up to support Southland nonprofits

Chicago-area philanthropies helping families and organizations struggling
with income loss

Daily Southtown - 25 May 2020 - 1 - By Zak Koeske

As the COVID-19 pandemic ravages the south suburbs, impacting thousands of families
and exacerbating the economic and public health disparities endemic to the region, a pair
of relief funds have e popped up t to help the Southland’s most vulnerable residents.

  

The Chicago Community COVID-19 Response Fund, launched i in mid-March, and the
Southland Family Support

Fund, announced this past week, aim to provide emergency financial support to those lo-
cally in need.

The COVID-19 Response Fund raises money from local philanthropies, corporations and
individual donors for distribution to nonprofits that serve populations disproportionately
impacted by COVID-19. To date, it has provided $1.825 million to more than two-dozen or-
ganizations in the south and southwest suburbs.

The Family Support Fund, which takes a more direct approach to assisting Southland fam-
ilies, will next week begin providing $500 cash transfers to at least 1,000 Southland fami-
lies directly affected by the pandemic.

Together, the funds are providing a lifeline to dozens of local social service organizations
and thousands of their struggling clients.

Kathy Straniero, executive director of Together We Cope, a Tinley Park-based homeless-
ness prevention agency that has received $75,000 from the COVID-19 Response Fund, said
she doesn’t know where her organization would be if it weren’t for the fund’s recent sup-
port.

The nonprofit, which serves 26 south and southwest suburban communities, was in a fi-
nancial bind after being forced to close its resale shop and cancel fundraising events to

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200525/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 18. 2 new relief funds step up to support Southland nonprofits

comply with the governor’s stay-at-home order, she said.

The grant funding, which the organization received in two installments, has allowed it to
stay in operation on the front lines of the pandemic.

Together We Cope has reduced its hours of operation and is doing client-services work by
phone or email, but has continued providing financial assistance and basic necessities like
food, clothing and personal care items to families at risk of losing their housing, she said.
Straniero said that despite the reduced hours, the organization’s food pantry is still dis-
tributing groceries to about 60 families each day, including many first-time clients.
“Since (the pandemic) happened, so many people need assistance,” she said. “We’re really
greatly impacted in the

southwest suburbs.”

Straniero estimated that about 20% of the people seeking assistance from Together We
Cope are new clients with no prior experience seeking public aid or even applying for un-
employment.

“‘We’re here to help them with all of that,” she said, noting that the organization often re-
ceives an influx of new clients during crises.

Sean Garrett, CEO of the United Way of Metro Chicago, said he’d been blown away by orga-
nizations like Together We Cope that have risen to meet the needs of local residents during
the pandemic.

“It’s something I hope people understand just how much the nonprofit community has
stepped up in this time,” said Garrett, whose own organization partnered with the Chicago
Community Trust and the city of Chicago to establish the COVID-19 Response Fund at the
outset of the pandemic.

Garrett said the United Way recognized early on that COVID-19 was going to have a pro-
found economic impact on the region and set out to create a central fund that social service
organizations could tap for resources.

“They’re standing at the front lines serving our communities at a risk to themselves and
we want to make sure there are dollars there for them,” he said.

The United Way and the Chicago Community Trust were able to leverage their longstand-
ing relationships with philanthropic and corporate supporters to launch the fund quickly
and have been fundraising ever since.

They’ve received $32.5 million in pledged support since mid-March, including $1.5 million
from individual small donors, and have distributed three rounds of funding totaling $18.5
million to nonprofits throughout the Chicago area to date, Garrett said.

In the Southland, where the fund has identified four key needs, it’s prioritizing support for
agencies that specialize in behavioral and mental health, food insecurity, senior care and
helping people meet their basic needs, he said.

Nonprofits that focus on hyperlocal work within those categories might receive a $25,000
grant, Garrett said, while organizations whose reach extends across the region could re-
ceive significantly more.

The Family Independence Initiative, a national organization that provides unrestricted
cash transfers to low-income families as a means of alleviating poverty, has been the
COVID-19 Response Fund’s largest single Southland-focused recipient.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200525/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 18. 2 new relief funds step up to support Southland nonprofits

The nonprofit received $500,000 from the fund and is providing direct cash transfers to
individuals and families in Chicago and the south suburbs, specifically.

In the coming days, the Family Independence Initiative will use half its COVID-19 Re-
sponse Fund grant and a matching amount it raised to transfer $500 to at least 1,000
Southland families, the organization said.

Money from the initiative, which is being referred to as the Southland Family Support
Fund, should start hitting residents’ bank accounts next week and will likely be exhausted
within 10 days, said Ebony Scott, the organization’s partnership director in Illinois.

The cash transfers, at least initially, will be disbursed to individuals and families who have
been identified by local social service organization partners as having been directly im-
pacted by COVID-19.

Scott said they may open the application process to families non connected to social ser-
vices, if the fund continues to grow, but that they didn’t want to create a competition for
scarce resources where a small fraction of applicants would receive cash transfers, but
most would walk away disappointed.

“We feel like people are stressed enough and feeling desperate enough,” she said.

Cook County Commissioner Donna Miller, a Lynwood Democrat, said she believed the cash
infusions would really make the difference for some families struggling to pay bills.
“Research has shown that cash transfers are costeffective, have the strongest track record
in reducing economic vulnerability and are proven to protect people’s standards of living
during crises,” she said. “As we begin to think about reopening the economy, money in-
jected into households can stimulate demand for goods and services in local economies,
leading to quicker recovery.”

Scott, a Tinley Park resident, said she was inspired to establish her organization’s South-
land fund after reading an editorial Miller wrote about COVID-19’s impact on the area and
the need for additional support.

She said she believed residents could use the $500 cash transfers to take small actions that
would help limit the spread of the virus like paying for food delivery, buying personal pro-
tective equipment and stocking up on groceries.

“We think cash is extremely flexible, cheap to deploy and it creates a space where families
have agency and can make decisions for themselves,” Scott said.

Garrett, the United Way of Metro Chicago CEO, said he’d been impressed by the way
Southland nonprofits and local elected officials had worked together to prioritize assis-
tance for those disproportionately affected by the pandemic.

He said the COVID-19 Response Fund was continuing to raise money from donors and
would likely disburse multiple additional rounds of funding to Southland nonprofits in the
coming weeks.

At some point, however, Garrett said he expected the fund would evolve from supporting
emergency needs to aiding recovery from the historic levels of unemployment devastating
regions like the Southland that have historically suffered from disinvestment.

He said there was no set date when the fund’s transition would occur, but that a time
would eventually come when rebuilding would become the focus.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200525/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 18. 2 new relief funds step up to support Southland nonprofits

“We're in uncharted territory,” Garrett said. “So we’re learning every day and we’re let-
ting the data shape were we go.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200525/page/1/textview 4/4
