2020. 6. 18. Support workers set for pay raise

Support workers set for pay raise

‘Clearly undervalued’ medical staff to see statewide wage increase

Daily Southtown « 2 Jun 2020: 1 - By Susan DeGrane

Doctors, nurses and certified nursing assistants aren’t the only health care workers mak-
ing great personal sacrifices during the pandemic. Direct support professionals who serve

eople with

teak wet

mental and developmental disabilities have done this as well.
| i

    
 

i _M ~

But DSPs are getting paid far less, with wages that vary depending on municipal and
county governments.

That circumstance is expected to improve slightly, thanks to the

Illinois General Assembly’s approval of a $1 increase in pay reimbursement for work per-
formed by DSPs starting July 1. The reimbursement will increase by an additional 50 cents
starting Jan. 1.

“It’s obvious we’re operating in a challenging budget environment, and care providers of
those with mental and developmental disabilities are being devastated by the pandemic,
but we must invest in those who serve this fragile population. It’s central to providing
good care,” said state Sen. Heather Steans, D-Chicago, who sponsored the legislation.
Regardless of a care provider’s local jurisdiction, maximum reimbursement for DSP pay
right now is $13 per hour from the Department of Human Services and the Department of
Healthcare and Family Services.

DSPs like Jerren Sims and Vashawn Spencer, who work in a group home in Crete, look for-
ward to bumps in pay. So does their employer, Trinity Services, Inc., a New Lenox-based
not-for profit serving people with developmental and mental disabilities in 30 Illinois
communities.

“My primary response is one of gratitude,” said Thane Dykstra, CEO for Trinity Services
“Prior to the pandemic, the role of the direct support professional was clearly underval-
ued.”

Still, for Trinity and other care providers serving people with mental and developmental
disabilities, plenty of hurdles remain for covering expenses related to the pandemic.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200602/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. Support workers set for pay raise

Much like certified nursing assistants, DSPs assist with bathing and dressing and can hand
out medications while receiving phone instructions from a nurse. They prepare meals, in-
cluding pureed dishes, do housekeeping and laundry. They also receive state certification
in CPR and training for working with people with mental disabilities.

Starting April 28, Sims and Spencer opted to shelter in place, rather than risk exposing
seven male residents in the group home where they work to the corona virus. They are
among 120 DSPs who chose to move into community-integrated living arrangements op-
erated by Trinity.

“I instantly knew it was the best option to keep everyone safe,” said Sims, 23, who other-
wise resides on Chicago’s South Side with his mom and sisters. “I miss my family, but I
knew this was better than coming and going.”

Spencer, also 23, also a South Sider, has an older brother with a mental disability, and con-
siders his job his calling for now. Still, he missed spending Easter, Mother’s Day and his
birthday with family members, his girlfriend and his new puppy.

“My family understood this was not easy, it was a matter of duty, something someone
ought to do,” he said.

Spencer and Sims would normally be paid $12 an hour. For sheltering in place, they receive
$18 per hour or time and a half once they clock more 40 hours per week and minus eight
hours of nightly sleep.

To support the shelter-in-place efforts of its DSPs, Trinity has accumulated $450,000 per
month in overtime pay, and statefunded reimbursements won’t cover these expenses, ac-
cording to Dykstra.

Moving forward, Trinity may trim back sheltering in place for DSPs to locations with older
residents and those with complex medical needs only, Dykstra said.

Trinity may also have to rethink its traditional fundraisers to pay off overtime expenses
related to the pandemic. It canceled a golf outing because attendees would not have the
opportunity to dine together. An annual 5K race has been made into a virtual event. Plans
for the Fall and holiday dinner dances are still up in the air.

Despite obvious challenges, Dykstra stands behind Trinity’s strategies for coping with the
pandemic.

“Our residents are safer than they were 70 days ago, so I don’t have any regrets we’ve
moved to the shelter-in-place model,” he said.

He’s also hopeful the state’s effort to increase pay reimbursements for DSPs can help re-
duce Trinity’s 20% vacancy rate to ensure quality care.

“T hate to lose staff who are good because they can make more working at a warehouse.
Amazon pays $15 per hour and refrigerated warehouses pay $20,” he said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200602/page/1/textview 2/2
