2020. 6. 18. CNU PRESIDENT CRITICIZED FOR ‘TONE DEAF’ EMAIL

CNU PRESIDENT CRITICIZED FOR ‘TONE DEAF’ EMAIL
Cites burglary of son’s clothing store in email about protests

Daily Press - 3 Jun 2020 - 1: By Matt Jones Staff writer

NEWPORT NEWS — Thousands of Christopher Newport University alumni and students
signed onto a letter criticizing a message sent Sunday by university President Paul Trible
Jr. addressing the protests around the country.

 

George Floyd — who died in police custody in Minneapolis as a police officer knelt on his
neck — and other victims of shootings, calling for “swift and certain” justice. He went on
to criticize destruction of property associated with the protests sweeping the country, in-
cluding those in Richmond. He cited the theft of merchandise and cash from his son’s lux-
ury clothing store on Broad Street as an example.

He then quotes Martin Luther

King Jr.: “As my sufferings mounted I soon realized that there were two ways in which I
could respond to my situation — either to react with bitterness or seek to transform the
suffering into a creative force. I decided to follow the latter course.”

A group of alumni quickly condemned the letter.

“He fails to recognize the institutional racism that many students of color have to face,”
said Marlon Dubuisson, a 2017 graduate with a degree in business marketing. “He almost
talked more about his disagreement with how they’ re protesting than why they’ re protest-
ing.”

According to university spokesman Jim Hanchett, Trible received the letter and would re-
spond to it Wednesday.

Dubuisson, who works as outreach director for Rep. Gerry Connolly (D-Fairfax), put up a
letter Monday on his Facebook page and Twitter co-signed by six other alumni calling the
message “tone deaf.”

In the following day, thousands of people responded asking

that their name be added. When the letter was sent Tuesday afternoon to Trible and the
Board of Visitors, it had 1,767 signatures.

“It’s not just black students who are saying this,” Dubuisson said. “It’s not just alumni
saying this. It is staff, it is white students, it is current students, and even incoming stu-
dents are reaching out to me.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200603/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. CNU PRESIDENT CRITICIZED FOR ‘TONE DEAF’ EMAIL

The former Republican congressman and senator has been president of the university
since 1996. His son, Paul Trible III, cofounded Ledbury in 2009 with Paul Watson, a fellow
graduate of Oxford Business School in the U.K. According to the company’s website, the
two had planned to pursue careers in finance before the 2008 recession, after which they
started making shirts.

Ledbury posted a photo to Instagram on Sunday of its showroom on West Broad Street in
Richmond. Much of the glass on the storefront had been knocked out.

A Facebook post to the university’s page with the letter, according to Hanchett, was
deleted because of CNU’s Facebook comment policy. The policy says that the university re-
serves the right to remove comments, links and photos for any reason, including deroga-
tory or defamatory comments.

‘“‘When it was also posted on Facebook, a thoughtful conversation with multiple viewpoints
was drowned out by comments that clearly violated our Facebook posting policy and left us
little choice but to delete the post,” Hanchett said in a statement.

The email still went out to the university and alumni. Dubuisson said he had been partici-
pating in protests in Washington when he got it.

He said he saw it when he got home that night and, drafted a response. But he decided to
let it sit overnight before sending.

The next day, Dubuisson said, he was invited with other former members of the CNU foot-
ball team to participate in a Zoom call with current players about what’s going on. When
Dubuisson mentioned the letter to the other players, they decided to co-sign and share the
letter on social media.

“I did not expect this kind of response,” Dubuisson said. “I’m honestly not sure what I ex-
pected.”

Dubuisson and other cosigners were in part concerned about Trible’s inclusion of the bur-
glary of his son’s store. Trible doesn’t mention racism until the end of the letter, instead
criticizing violence at the beginning.

“We are the ones trying to uplift CNU’s name,” Dubuisson said. “But yet, that degree
won’t protect me from the police. They don’t know I have a degree from Christopher New-
port University; they just see my black skin.”

Dubuisson said that he experienced racist incidents while a student — sometimes hearing
from others that he’s “one of the good ones,” while some of his fellow football players
were described as the opposite.

After sharing the letter, about two dozen people volunteered to help him get signatures
into the letter and edited.

“People, no matter when they graduated, want the best out of their institutions,” Dubuis-
son said. “We want to be proud that we went to CNU.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200603/page/1/textview 2/2
