2020. 6. 18. Richmond imposes a curfew after protests end in violence and property damage.

Richmond imposes a curfew after protests end in violence
and property damage.

Mayor calls for action after large protests led to violence, damage

Daily Press - 1 Jun 2020 - 1 - Associated Press

RICHMOND — The mayor of Virginia’s capital city said a curfew will be imposed Sunday
evening after two nights of large protests that led to violence, injuries and property dam-
age.

Richmond Mayor Levar Stoney announced at a news conference that Gov. Ralph Northam
had granted his request to impose a curfew that will take effect at 8 p.m. Sunday and last
until 6 a.m. It will remain in effect nightly until further notice.

Stoney said he understands the community is in pain and is mourning the death of George
Floyd, a handcuffed black man who pleaded for air as a white police officer pressed his
knee on his neck. Protests raged across Virginia and the nation Saturday night over Floyd’s
death and other instances of mistreatment of African Americans at the hands of police.
But Stoney condemned the “violence and destruction” that left some Richmond protesters
injured and many businesses along the protest route damaged. Workers were cleaning up
broken glass and other debris Sunday morning.

“That will not be allowed any further in the city of Richmond,” Stoney said.

Several of the city’s most prominent Confederate monuments were covered in graffiti
Sunday morning, including a statue of Confederate President Jefferson Davis that had
“cops ran us over,” spray-painted on the base. A noose had been flung over Davis’ shoul-
der.

At the headquarters of the United Daughters of the Confederacy, which news outlets re-
ported was vandalized and set ablaze overnight, a few men with long guns were among a
small crowd gathered outside. One man said they were there to protect the building.
Northam said in a statement that the Virginia National Guard was “on alert” to assist in
Richmond as needed.

The governor said he affirmed the deep concerns from the black community but also said
“others are exploiting this pain and are now causing violence.”

Richmond Police Chief William Smith said at the news conference that people were injured
overnight due to “protester on protester violence,” including a man who he said was shot
by a protester.

Smith also said protesters set fire to an occupied building and then blocked the fire depart-
ment’s access to the structure.

Smith, who seemed overcome with emotion as he described the incident, said there had
been a child inside the building. Officers were able to help the people out safely, he said.
Other protests went on Saturday night across Virginia,

including in Portsmouth, Roanoke and Manassas, where Virginia State Police said a
trooper was struck in the head with a brick but sustained only a minor injury.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200601/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. Richmond imposes a curfew after protests end in violence and property damage.

A second trooper struck in the leg with a rock also sustained a minor injury, VSP spokes-
woman Corinne Geller said in a statement.

Geller said state police, who responded to assist Prince William County police, used pepper
spray and other agents to disperse what she called a violent crowd.

State Del. Lee Carter, whose district includes Manassas, said on Twitter that he was gassed
by authorities at the protest and had a “flash-bang” grenade thrown at him.

On Sunday the Republican Party of Virginia called on Carter, a Democrat and socialist, to
resign after they say a video showed him threatening to cut the budget of Virginia State
Police in a confrontation with officers during the protests.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200601/page/1/textview 2/2
