2020. 6. 18. ‘TM STILL TRYING TO FIGURE OUT WHO | AM WITHOUT HER’

‘’M STILL TRYING TO FIGURE OUT WHO | AM WITHOUT
HER’

Daily Press - 1 Jun 2020 - 1 - By Peter Coutu Staff writer

VIRGINIA BEACH — Jason Nixon stood in front of Building 2 again — his life on Sunday
unrecognizable from a year ago.

 

At the same time in 2019, stuck outside that building, he paced around for more than half
an hour, worrying about his wife, Kate Nixon. She had been shot near her second-floor of-
fice and gunfire continued to hammer away.

The call had come from his wife minutes before. I’ve been shot, she

said, call 911.

He arrived just as police sealed the area off to the public. So he found himself waiting —
officers stopping his first instinct to run into the building — and wishing he had spent
more time on the phone with her.

Kate Nixon, 42, was among the 12 killed during Virginia Beach’s deadliest shooting. Four
more were seriously injured but survived. The gunman was killed in a shootout with police.
As he grieved for his wife, that May 31 catapulted his life into a flurry of activity — calling
lawmakers, reaching out to other victims’ families and never shying away from sharing his
opinion, all to fight for more accountability in the investigation into the employeeturned-
gunman and the city’s handling of the tragedy.

But now, he just stood quietly, steps away from the building he fought months ago to be
torn down, about to end the first year without Kate.

“1’m still trying to figure out who I am without her,” he said.

With his three daughters — Morgan, Madilyn and Mackenzie, ages 14, 7 and 2 — he walk...
up to the building where his wife had worked as a supervisor in the public utilities depart-
ment. At the planter designated for her, they left posters, flowers, her favorite coffee and
hand-painted rocks. Nearby stood dozens of neighborhood friends who helped Nixon get
through the past year.

Kate kept him steady, he said. She was logical, and he was sociable, a combination that
worked for the pair.

“And now I don’t have that anymore,” he said. “I’m kind of lopsided.”

Fighting for Kate

Since the mass shooting, Jason Nixon has become the most public face of the tragedy.

In the days after May 31, 2019, he raised concerns over the city’s response before the

shooting, called for the release of the gunman’s personnel records and pushed for an inde-
https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200601/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 18. ‘TM STILL TRYING TO FIGURE OUT WHO | AM WITHOUT HER’

pendent investigation.

Some family members of other victims joined these causes, while most remained quiet.
For Nixon, a real estate agent, much of the motivation stems from a conversation he had
with his wife the night before the shooting when he had encouraged her to take a gun to
work because of her concerns over a colleague who had been fired but did not end up being
the shooter.

He has pitched lawmakers on the need for a state investigation. He called for Virginia
Beach’s top official — then-city manager Dave Hansen — to be fired for his handling of
the tragedy and its aftermath (he eventually resigned). He has pleaded for answers, im-
ploring anyone who would listen to come forward and talk publicly. He pushed for Building
2, which housed the public utilities, public works, IT and planning departments at the
city’s municipal center, to be torn down.

Recently, Nixon launched Virginia Strong, a nonprofit to raise scholarship money for
women in engineering, in honor of his wife, and to study what triggers people to commit
mass shootings.

Nixon has won some battles — the city approved a third-party review and the state ap-
pears to be moving forward with its own investigation — while Virginia Beach hasn’t
budged on others. The independent review and law enforcement have not found a motive
for the shooting.

“What happened to Kate is unsettled with me. I can’t lay my head down at night and sleep
comfortably knowing that I haven’t done everything I can do for her,” he said. “That’s
who I am. Nothing is going to change that, the way I feel about that.”

But the fight has taken a toll.

Last summer and fall, he was throwing up every morning, physically sick from grief and
anxiety. He was in and out of emergency rooms, from Virginia Beach to Florida, where he
took a vacation with his daughters. Eventually, he had surgery to remove his gallbladder,
which was filled with stones.

He dropped some 50 pounds because of the stress. Physically, he’s feeling better now.

But a host of coping techniques haven’t worked. He’s unable to doze off until 3 or 4 a.m.
most mornings. His wife’s ashes remain on the nightstand on her side of the bed. He’s not
yet ready to move her to the bench he had made for her in a nearby cemetery. How unfair is
it, he said, that everything he and Kate built together suddenly became his alone.

“It’s not the same without her,” he said. “She should be here with us.”

He still gushes over Kate, his wife of 19 years, boasting about her brilliance, how strong of
a mother she was and how integral she was to the city.

“When God made her, he broke the mold,” Nixon said.

He wants to move forward but isn’t sure how.

May has been especially tough. Mother’s Day — their last holiday together, and one of
Kate’s favorites — was difficult. Last year, he made breakfast for Kate and the girls, who
gave their mom necklaces and bracelets they made.

This year, his sister, Mandy NixonHammer, took his girls strawberry picking. Their dad
stayed home, unable to join the group.

‘I miss her’

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200601/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 18. ‘TM STILL TRYING TO FIGURE OUT WHO | AM WITHOUT HER’

At noon, Morgan and Madilyn stood outside the family’s front-yard garden, which their
mom started when they moved into the house around 2008. The two daughters took over
the task this year, planting the crops the day before Easter. Madilyn’s favorite is the water-
melon, Morgan’s are the snap peas.

The girls have grown so much in the last year, Nixon said.

He’s been working on potty training Mackenzie, a first for both of them.

“There’s so many things that I took for granted. Kate would just do it because she loved
doing it. And I was like, ‘OK, cool. You take care of that, I’m good. Tell me when you need
me.’ “That’s all gone now. It’s on me.” Morgan, now a teenager, is starting to become a
woman, he said. It’s been especially tough with schools closed down since mid-March. He
bought Madilyn, who said she loves online school, some extra first-grade workbooks so
she stays on top of her studies.

Often, one of the girls will say something — maybe it’s a sarcastic comment from Morgan
— and Nixon will do a double-take: “That’s Kate,” he says.

He wants to keep his wife alive in their kids. He’s trying to get them to write their memo-
ries in a book so Mackenzie can read them and get a better sense of who she was.
“(Mackenzie) was robbed of her mom,” he said. “She’s never going to have those memo-
ries that Morgan and Madilyn have.”

Each of the girls has anxiety, he said. Sometimes, they cry at night too, like their dad. But
friends say they’re recovering well, and the whole neighborhood has pitched in.

At the sound of honking outside their home, the three Nixon girls turned around to see a
caravan of golf carts leading dozens of cars carrying neighborhood families.

“We love you Nixons,” one yelled. “We miss you Kate,” another said. The girls ran out to
grab signs, flowers and gifts. Many of them, some childhood friends of Jason Nixon, stayed
the rest of the afternoon, drinking coffee, eating donuts and talking.

As the group readied to head to Building 2, Nixon was still fussing over what to leave at the
site. He loves this picture of his wife having a baby shower at work, he said. And the one of
her on their wedding day, holding a bouquet with big sunglasses on.

“T just want to make sure we do it right,” he said, upset over Virginia Beach’s plans for the
day.

The city canceled its in-person services due to the coronavirus pandemic, opting for vir-
tual ceremonies and encouraging residents to take part in personal remembrances, like
wearing blue or placing Forget-Me-Not signs in their windows. Virginia Beach Mayor
Bobby Dyer led an online ceremony released at 4:06 p.m. on Sunday, roughly when the
shooting started last year.

In this video, Dyer spoke of the city’s resilience after the tragedy. Tributes to each of the 12
victims were played.

“As we continue our struggle to make sense of this awful tragedy, we will always look for
ways to honor their memories,” he said.

The Nixon family and their friends arrived at about 3 p.m. to set up everything they
brought for Kate. Nixon put 22 roses on her planter — 19 red ones for each year of their
marriage and three pink ones for each of the girls. As 4 p.m. approached, Madilyn sat on
the ground drawing a star, the sun and a heart on the sidewalk with chalk. Mackenzie ran

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200601/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 18. ‘TM STILL TRYING TO FIGURE OUT WHO | AM WITHOUT HER’

around carrying a red-and-blue pinwheel. Morgan talked to friends. Their dad stood

nearby, surrounded by friends and family, at times talking to a TV station and some politi-
cians.

At 4:06, the minute his wife was shot, everyone stood silently.

Nixon said he replayed the last call with his wife, wishing he would’ve told her to run. To
hide.

That he loved her.
“T just miss her,” he said. “There’s nothing I can do about it.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200601/page/1/textview 4/4
