2020. 6. 18. COULD CITIES CLOSE DOOR ON OPEN CARRY?

COULD CITIES CLOSE DOOR ON OPEN CARRY?

Gun control decisions — at least some of them — will soon shift to cities
and counties

Daily Press - 8 Jun 2020 - 1 - By Peter Dujardin Staff writer

HAMPTON — Gun owners in Virginia have long had the freedom to carry their weapons
openly at city parks and in public buildings.
ee ee Zi aoe

   

But that could soon change — at least in some localities.

Hampton Mayor Donnie Tuck said last week that the city is considering cracking down on
the “open carrying” of firearms at its libraries and parks — including

Buckroe Beach and Sandy Bottom Nature Park — as well as at festivals and events that re-
quire city permits.

Though guns in Virginia are overwhelmingly carried concealed, those who “open carry”
typically wear their handguns holstered on their hips — or in the case of a rifle, slung over
their shoulder or on their backs — so others can see.

Tuck said Hampton officials see a ban on open carrying as a way to reduce the alarm that
other residents sometimes express when they see handguns and rifles being openly carried
about.

“Tf it’s concealed, perhaps it’s no problem,” the mayor said at a May 27 Hampton City
Council meeting. “But if you pull it out, there’s a problem ... And we have a responsibility to
our citizens, to individuals who don’t feel comfortable with it.”

If Hampton enacts such a ban, the city would become one of the first localities in Virginia
to adopt new gun control measures under a new state law that goes into effect July 1.

Del. Marcia “Cia” Price, DNewport News, sponsored the legislation that led to allowing city
councils and county boards to pass limited gun control measures.

The localities still can’t broadly ban firearms throughout their jurisdictions. But they can
restrict guns — both open carry and concealed — at public parks and buildings, as well as
at community centers and recreation centers under their control.

“A locality may adopt an ordinance that prohibits the possession, carrying, or transporta-
tion of any firearms, ammunition, or components or combination thereof” at these loca-
tions, the new law reads. The legislation also allows the city to restrict guns at permitted
events.

Strong opposition

Some localities are beginning to discuss new gun restrictions, with measures said to be on
the drawing boards in Alexandria and Loudoun County in Northern Virginia.

But gun rights activists say they won’t let new firearms bans pass without a fight.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200608/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 18. COULD CITIES CLOSE DOOR ON OPEN CARRY?

“We're fed up with this stuff,” said Philip Van Cleave, the president of the Virginia Citizens
Defense League, a Richmond-based gun rights organization. “We're sick and tired of being
blamed and restricted for what criminals do. We’re not criminals.”

The organization’s volunteers in each locality, he said, are closely monitoring public
meetings statewide.

“Anytime they’ re going to start talking about gun control, they’re going to be reminded
that it really is the third rail,” Van Cleave said. “We’re going to get a lot of people to show
up and say, ‘No more gun control, guys,’ We don’t need any more gun control that does
not stop crime.”

Six members of the Virginia Citizens Defense League, for example, came out at the Hamp-
ton City Council meeting on May 27, in part to respond to Tuck’s prior comments on a local
radio show.

Among them was A.C. Cardoza, 30, an engineering technician at Newport News Shipbuild-
ing who recently garnered about 10% of the vote after jumping into the City Council race
on a gun rights platform three months before the election.

He sometimes open carries a handgun on his hip, saying he should be free to do so, includ-
ing at Hampton’s public parks. “I think it’s every American’s constitutional right, and I
think it dissuades crime,” Cardoza said.

Changing Virginia’s gun laws

The recent state law begins to undo more than three decades in which gun policy has be-
come almost exclusively the province of state and federal lawmakers rather than local
ones.

In 1987, the General Assembly barred cities and counties from passing any new gun control
measures, save for local zoning, hunting and shooting rules. State lawmakers went further
in 2004, throwing out older local gun control ordinances, too.

One exception is that cities and counties can still bar the carrying of loaded rifles and shot-
guns in vehicles.

And in 13 larger localities — including Newport News, Norfolk, Chesapeake and Virginia
Beach locally — state law bans the open carrying of loaded semiautomatic weapons and
shotguns with certain magazine sizes or other features.

Seeking to give the state’s localities more leeway to adopt their own gun restrictions, Price
filed bills in four straight legislative sessions.

She finally got a bill through this year, part of a slate of new gun laws passed by a Demo-
crat-controlled legislature. But Price’s original bill — which have allowed cities and coun-
ties broad discretion to restrict firearms — was sharply narrowed in the legislative
process.

In the end, the new law says localities can impose new gun rules, but only at public parks,
public buildings, recreation and community centers, and permitted events. (Guns are al-
ready restricted at Virginia schools under a separate state law.)

Even then, lawmakers passed the new legislation only narrowly — 48-45 in the House of
Delegates and 21-19 in the Senate. Gov. Ralph Northam signed the bill into law in April.
Though the new law didn’t go as far as she wanted, Price says it’s a move in the right di-
rection.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200608/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 18. COULD CITIES CLOSE DOOR ON OPEN CARRY?

“T think it’s a significant step forward to getting the localities the empowerment that they
need in order to do what they need to do to keep their residents safe,” she said.

“T definitely celebrate this as a win for not just gun violence prevention, but for the ability
for us to be in spaces that are welcoming and inclusive to everyone,” Price added. “Espe-
cially the public spaces where everyone’s tax dollars go and where (government services)
are rendered.”

Discussions now underway

Lots of counties have no plans to adopt any new gun restrictions.

York County Board of Supervisors Chairman Chad Green said he generally supports the
state giving more autonomy to cities and counties. But no new gun restrictions are planned
for his county, he said.

“We believe in the right to bear arms in York County,” Green said. “I don’t see that we
have a problem in York. And I don’t think we need to address anything that isn’t a prob-
lem.”

But in Alexandria, Van Cleave said, city leaders are pushing to ban all guns — both con-
cealed and open carry — at publicly owned buildings and parks, with exceptions for police
and others.

“They’re going for the whole enchilada,” he said, saying the city has drafted a proposed
ordinance that would be voted on this summer. “That’s just who they are.”

‘Open carry’ at issue

Though Hampton has not yet drafted a proposed ordinance or set a vote, Tuck said the city
was unlikely to ban concealed handguns at city buildings and parks.

But “open carry” is a different story.

Tuck and City Manager Mary Bunting said at the May 27 council meeting that many
Hampton residents are “alarmed” by open carry, and are often quick to call police when
they see it.

“Many people will call in and report feeling unsafe when they see people walking around in
the parks or in the libraries, openly displaying assault rifles,” Bunting said. “It makes
them feel uncomfortable. They want to be able to enjoy their parks and libraries without
such fear.”

Price, for her part, said public places should be “welcoming to all.”

“This idea that you should be able to walk wherever — in the library during story time with
the kindergartners — and have a firearm on your side, that is spoken from a (narrow) per-
spective,” Price said. “Are we going to start driving families out of libraries ... just to prove
that you have the right to carry something?”

The lawmaker also pointed out that, unlike with concealed handguns, there’s no permit
necessary to open carry in Virginia. That means there’s no background check or mandated
gun proficiency training, either.

“There’s been no standard that you’ve had to prove that you at least know how to use the
weapon safely enough for me not to be hurt by being around you,” Price said.

But gun rights advocates don’t buy Price’s contention that people need to demonstrate
proficiency before they can carry a gun.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200608/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 18. COULD CITIES CLOSE DOOR ON OPEN CARRY?

“We shouldn’t have to all take a class to exercise our rights,” Cardoza said. “You don’t
need a class to know that if someone’s coming at you in your bedroom at night with a gun,
that you need to pull a trigger and stop them.”

“Everybody generally knows that to use a gun, you pull the trigger,” he said, adding that
gun sellers will tell buyers how to engage and disengage the safety, aim and fire. “That’s
really all you need to know to defend yourself.”

Just because some are queasy about seeing guns openly carried, Cardoza said, that’s no
reason to ban the practice. “That is not an alarm,” he said. “That’s not an emergency.
That’s not even suspicious. It shouldn’t be treated that way.”

“When criminals are identified as a criminal, they can’t have guns anymore,” Cardoza
said. “That’s how it works.”

Guns and workplace safety

Aside from parks and libraries, Price said, the new legislation will enhance workplace
safety by allowing localities to restrict guns in government buildings.

“Most folks that roll up to City Hall, it’s not because they’re pleased with something,”
Price said. “There’s an issue they have to work out ... If I (as a city worker) am trying to get
to the root of their issue, why should I have to be intimidated with a firearm?”

Her father, Newport News Mayor McKinley Price, said he was open to the Newport News
City Council considering new gun restrictions. “I’m concerned especially when you see
people coming with firearms in areas where there are high emotions,” he said.

“You have people who come to the clerk’s office when they’ re having financial difficulties,
or they go to health and human services with their problems — and there is no protec-
tion,” the mayor said. “I would definitely like some constructive conversation about mak-
ing sure our staff is protected and feels safe.”

Gun rights activists, on the other hand, assert that “gun free zones” don’t provide such
protection.

“This is not about safety,” Cardoza said. “It’s about disarming people. And it’s not what
we need. The only thing that stops a bad guy is a good guy with a gun. When you have bad
guys and you don’t have a gun, who do you call? You call the police — good guys with
guns.”

In the end, Van Cleave predicts, most localities around the state won’t adopt new local gun
restrictions. But when they try to do so, he said, gun rights activists will be ready to fend
them off.

“There’s nothing worse than trying to fix a problem that doesn’t exist,” he said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200608/page/1/textview 4/4
