2020. 6. 18. Homer Glen boy designs winning hospital gown

Homer Glen boy designs winning hospital gown

Tyler Cepkauskas, 6, inspired to bring some comfort to little sister

Daily Southtown « 2 Jun 2020 - 1 - By Jesse Wright

Tyler Cepkauskas’ little sister is sick.

 

 

 

 

Emily Cepkauskas, 4, has Down syndrome and a congenital heart defect, so she spends a
lot of time at the hospital, away from her 6-year-old brother. And like most big brothers,
Tyler wanted to do something to help his little sister.

Laurie Cepkauskas, of Homer Glen, the mother of the two, said Emily’s condition has
meant seven different surgeries and months in the hospital.

“The longest stretch was four months,” she said.

Over that time, Tyler asked frequently about his little sister, and he asked his mom to send
along his stuffed animals or a pillow so his sister could know he was thinking of her and
remember his smell.

“He would get really sad when he couldn’t see her,” Laurie said.

But now Emily, and many other children, will have something much closer from Tyler — a
soft, comfortable hospital gown that he designed and the Starlight Children’s Foundation
created.

Each year, Starlight, a California-based nonprofit that works to provide happiness to sick
children as part of their healing, holds a competition for a child to design a hospital gown.
This year, Tyler’s design won.

“We have programs in 850 hospitals and pediatrics units throughout the country,” said
Starlight CEO Adam Garone. “We want to take away as much stress and anxiety from the
kids and their family as we can.”

The Cepkauskas family heard about Starlight and the annual contest because of the gowns.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200602/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. Homer Glen boy designs winning hospital gown

“Emily was gifted a Starlight gown at the hospital,” Laurie said. “Those gowns literally
feel like soft blankets. They’re so comfortable, they’re so bright. They’re amazing. I fell in
love with those gowns three years ago after her second surgery. These were so soft, so
comfy, it was like wrapping her up in a blanket. It made all the difference.”

Tyler’s design is a bright, colorful background with island of white, and inside each island,
Tyler wrote things like “hope,” “survivor,” “fighter” and “love.”

“T always teach Tyler that words are important. You can’t take back words,” Laurie said.
“He understands that words impact.”

She said she wasn’t so surprised by the win.

“His design was completely designed from the ground up based on a 6-year-old’s heart. I
think that’s what made his stand out was his personal connection,” she said.

Garone confirmed they picked Tyler’s design as a finalist in part because of the inspiring
story.

“A big part of it is the story that sits alongside the design,” Garone said. “When you the
story is so great. When you have a sick child, the siblings are the ones who are as equally
impacted. They’re on this journey as well.”

After the Starlight team picks a list of finalists, each family must

raise votes via social media to win and the Cepkauskas family nailed it.

Garone said the gowns will take about two months to create and from there will be distrib-
uted free to children who need them. He said these gowns are softer and more comfortable
than the traditional hospital gowns.

“One of the most stressful times in the hospital for kids is when they take off their clothes
and put on their gowns,” Garone said.

Anyone can help get gowns to children by donating at Starlight.org. Each $25 donation
funds one gown, “and gown are in great need at this time,” Garone said.

For now, the Cepkauskas family is together. Laurie said Emily’s last surgery was in
November, so she’s out of the hospital with her older brother.

“We are doing really well,” she said.

Laurie has a public Facebook group called Emily’s Heart. It open to anyone, but in particu-
lar she wanted to share her story with parents who have children with serious illnesses.
For Tyler and Emily, it’s been a busy week. They both finished their studies and then Tyler
discovered his desire to help his sister will help many more children.

“TI want them to feel happy,” he said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200602/page/1/textview 2/2
