2020. 6. 18. South suburbs well ahead on casino

South suburbs well ahead on casino
Tax changes raise odds a bit for Chicago

Daily Southtown - 28 May 2020 - 1 - Ted Slowik

The south suburbs are on pace to have a casino up and running well before the city of
Chicago opens a casino, according to the state legislature’s point person for gaming issues.

   

The timing of when each facility opens matters in a highly competitive market where cus-
tomer losses could be considered wins for taxpayers.

“The south suburbs are on a faster track. Their applications are filed. They’re well ahead of
Chicago,” said state Rep. Bob Rita, D-Blue Island.

The Illinois Gaming Board, by law, must choose by October from among four applicants
seeking to build the south suburban casino in Calumet City, East Hazel Crest/Homewood,
Lynwood or Matteson.

Plans for a so-called “racino,” however, appear to have stalled. Last year, the former Tin-
ley Park Mental Health Center property unexpectedly fell out of contention. There is no
progress to report on efforts to build a new horse racing track with thousands of gaming
positions in the south suburbs, Rita said.

“There’s been a lot of talk about trying to allow it in Crete, the old Balmoral Park,” Rita
said. However, state law requires that the racino be located in one of six southern Cook
County townships, and Balmoral is in Will County.

It would take a lot of “horse trading” for Rita to convince legislative colleagues who repre-
sent southern Cook and eastern Will counties to support changes affecting the racino. The
Southland Regional Mayoral Black Caucus last year asked lawmakers to delay the racino,
saying it would be tough for two large gaming facilities to both succeed in the area.

Rita’s role is to balance the often competing interests of various stakeholders. His job is to
strike compromises that satisfy owners of establishments where customers gamble at
video terminals as well as municipalities that collect tax revenue from them. He works to
cut deals that are agreeable to casino developers and operators as well as horse breeders
and track owners.

“It gets really interesting,” Rita said. “It’s very challenging.”

Legislators approved changes to the tax structure for a Chicago casino and tweaked other
parts of a major gaming expansion law approved a year ago. Along with approving a $40
billion state budget, the gaming bill approved over the Memorial Day weekend was one of
the Illinois General Assembly’s few accomplishments during a pandemic-shortened ses-
sion.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200528/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 18. South suburbs well ahead on casino

“We kept the scope very limited,” Rita said of the gaming bill.

The biggest change lowers the overall tax rate for the proposed Chicago casino. A year ago,
lawmakers set a structure that gave the state a big share of tax revenues to fund construc-
tion projects. It also allowed Chicago to impose a “privilege tax” to help fund pensions for
retired police officers and firefighters.

The combined tax rate hurt the project’s profitability. A consultant’s feasibility study re-
leased last summer concluded the proposed taxes were too “onerous” to attract prospec-
tive investors.

The initial tax structure approved a year ago tried to adjust to a change from a city-owned
casino to a privately owned one, Rita said. Chicago Mayor Lori Lightfoot lobbied for law-
makers to approve the tax changes during the veto session in November, but legislators
took no action.

The site for the Chicago casino is undetermined. Lightfoot last year proposed five locations
on the city’s South and West sides, including a site near the Harborside golf course at 111th
Street and the Bishop Ford Freeway.

That location is only a few miles from Calumet City, one of four sites being considered for
the south suburban casino. Concerns about market saturation and revenue “cannibaliza-
tion” are ever-present, like the threat of a face card ruining a blackjack hand.

“She assured us it would not be in a location to hurt any other casino, that it wouldn’t be
too close to others in the northern or southern suburbs,” Rita said.

Gov. J.B. Pritzker is expected to sign the recent changes into law.

The lower tax rates will reduce tax revenue the Chicago casino is expected to generate by
about $350 million annually, though the facility is still projected to create about $500 mil-
lion in annual tax revenue.

Other changes in the bill affect applications to operate a casino in Danville and allow visi-
tors to play video gaming terminals at the Illinois State Fair.

For a long time, Illinois lawmakers seemed reluctant to tackle gaming legislation following
the legalization of 10 riverboat gambling licenses in 1990. Gradually, legislators approved
land-based casinos, then video gaming. Negotiators hammered out expansion compro-
mises in 2012 and 2013, but then-Gov. Pat Quinn vetoed the bills.

Following last year’s approval of sports betting, six additional casino licenses, gaming ter-
minals at race tracks and airports and other significant changes, lawmakers appear to have
anew mindset about gaming legislation, Rita said.

“My hope is that there will be a gaming bill every year,” Rita said. “There used to be a
gaming bill once every 15 years. Now, we can do a bill every year.”

Gaming in Illinois and other places throughout the country screeched to a sudden halt in
mid-March as concerns spread about the COVID-19 respiratory disease that has killed
about 100,000 Americans.

The safety of patrons and employees is the top priority guiding discussions about when
casinos may reopen and video gaming will be allowed to resume, a spokesman for the
gaming board said Wednesday.

“We are working in close coordination with the governor’s office and the Illinois Depart-
ment of Public Health on the safe resumption of gaming within the Restore Illinois frame-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200528/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 18. South suburbs well ahead on casino

work,” gaming board spokesman Gene O’Shea said in a statement responding to an
inquiry.

Authorities in other areas are ready to allow gaming to resume. Las Vegas is poised to allow
casinos and affiliated entertainment venues to reopen on June 4, according to multiple
news reports. Casinos in Indiana are on track to potentially reopen on June 14, pending ap-
proval of sitespecific procedural plans submitted to the state’s gaming board.

The Illinois Gaming Board will meet as scheduled on June 11, O’Shea said. The board post-
poned its most recent session that was set for April 22.

Despite disruptions to the coronavirus pandemic, he said, the gaming board continues its
work evaluating applications for new casinos in the south suburbs and other locations
throughout the state. The gaming board is “processing, vetting and investigating” 10 new
casino license applications, O’Shea said.

Four of the 10 applicants are vying for one available license to operate a casino in the south
suburbs.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200528/page/1/textview 3/3
