2020. 6. 18. HATS OFF, MASKS ON

HATS OFF, MASKS ON

An unusual graduation season calls for unusual celebrations for graduates

Daily Press - 8 Jun 2020: 1: By Matt Jones, Sara Gregory and Gordon Rago Staff writers

NORFOLK — There were tears at first when Layonna Gwynn and her high school class-
mates realized all the senior events they’d been looking forward to for four years wouldn’t
happen. Spring sports seasons. Prom. A chance to walk across the stage and accept a
diploma.

  

But Gwynn, the salutatorian at Norfolk’s Booker T. Washington High School, said coron-
avirus or not, she and other seniors have worked too hard not to celebrate the milestone
fully. Now that graduation season is here, schools and families like hers are determined to
make the most of it.

“This one pandemic is not going to stop us,” said Gwynn, who’s headed to the University
of Virginia next year to study early childhood education and entrepreneurship. Necessity is
the mother of invention, and with health restrictions forcing celebrations to happen at a
distance, this year’s graduation celebrations don’t look anything like those of past years.
There’s hope that, safety permitting, seniors might be able to reconvene for more tradi-
tional ceremonies in August. But for now, there will be virtual celebrations, like the
Virginia Graduates Together video that premiered on Virginia PBS stations on May 29, and
in-person festivities at a distance. There are drive-thru ceremonies and car parades
planned, and some schools plan to turn their stadium lights on each night next week for
exactly 20 minutes and 20 seconds. Other schools have handed out yard signs.

“Survived 12 years and quarantine,” Maury High School seniors’ signs boast.

The creativity has made gradua

tion still feel special, said Brian McBride, a Hampton High School senior whose video mes-
sage was aired on the statewide ceremony.

The pandemic took away his senior baseball season, which he and his teammates hoped
could be a tribute to their coach Danny Mitchell after he died in February. But McBride,

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200608/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. HATS OFF, MASKS ON

who plans to play baseball and study biochemistry at Eastern Mennonite University next,
looks on the bright side.

“They say that we’re going down in history,” McBride said. “At the same time, we’re kind
of making history.”

Most districts have several weeks of celebrations planned. Chesapeake’s started last week
with drive-thru celebrations at each high school. At his appointed time, Zach Sabbato’s
family showed up at Great Bridge High School in a car decked out with balloons and the
teen dressed in a shirt and tie and green cap and gown.

Sabbato is headed to James

Madison University in the fall and wants to join the family line of work by becoming an
elementary school teacher. Driving him up to his high school Thursday was his aunt, a
teacher in Roanoke. In the back seat, his parents: mom is an assistant principal at Deep
Creek Middle School and dad teaches Spanish at Hickory High School.

As they slowly drove by the front of Great Bridge High School, Sabbato was cheered on and
congratulated over and over again, getting thumbs up from Principal Jeff Johnson. He got a
senior gift and his diploma and picture taken in front of a cardboard cutout of Johnson.

“It was a lot to take in,” Sabbato said after finishing the drive-thru. “I think a lot of us are
bored of sitting at home. It’s nice not to have something canceled.”

Megan, Liam and Claire Geith — triplets graduating from Kecoughtan High School in
Hampton — have tried to fill the time between Zoom classes the best they can. Liam kept
working at his job at Auto Bell; Megan is baking a lot of banana bread.

“Tt hasn’t been too bad,” Megan, one of Kecoughtan’s two valedictorians, said.

A lot of their plans for their senior sports seasons and celebrations were put on hold.
They’re still hoping to hold a big party in August before they go their separate ways: Me-
gan to Old Dominion University, Liam to Thomas Nelson Community College and Claire to
James Madison.

Monday, they got a chance to take photos together in their robes with their principal out-
side the Hampton Coliseum, where Hampton City Schools set up high school stages to look
like a normal graduation. A professional photographer took their photos, and they’ll get
prints after a car parade and virtual ceremony later this month.

Gwynn, the Norfolk graduate, said she plans to put on makeup and do her hair on Monday
for her graduation, even if it’s just a virtual ceremony aired on Channel 47 and YouTube
that she’ll watch at home with her parents and brother. Her aunt, a photographer, will take
photos after.

She was nervous about giving the salutatorian speech in front of a crowd of people, so get-
ting to prerecord her speech for the virtual ceremony was actually a blessing, Gwynn said.
It was cool to see the television station studio and the whole process of filming a gradua-
tion ceremony.

Another silver lining, Norfolk executive director John Coleman said, is that families can
celebrate as loudly as they want.

“Maybe one of the positives is every family should be able to hear their child’s name called
this year,” Coleman said. “I do suspect that across our city you’ll hear bits of roars coming
from every household. I hope so.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200608/page/1/textview 2/2
