2020. 6. 18. CNU’S TRIBLE ISSUES APOLOGY

CNU’S TRIBLE ISSUES APOLOGY

Daily Press - 4 Jun 2020 - 1 - By Matt Jones Staff writer Matt Jones, 757-247-4729, mjones@dailypress.com

After a letter highlighting property damage caused by rioters caused a stir, CNU President
Paul Trible proclaims his support for “deep and systemic” change in the wake of the death
of George Floyd.

ths
NEWPORT NEWS — Christopher Newport University president Paul Trible Jr. sent a letter
to the university Wednesday apologizing for a message he sent Sunday about protests
against police brutality.

In the earlier letter, Trible cited the burglary of his son’s luxury menswear store in Rich-
mond as an example of destruction of property associated with the protests and con-
demned violence.

Marlon Dubuisson, a 2017 graduate, started an open letter in response that gained thou-
sands of signatures from alumni, students and staff.

Trible attached an image of that letter in his message Wednesday along with the response
that he sent Dubuisson, asking that his name be added to Dubuisson’s petition.

“T hear your cry for change and appreciate your thoughtful message,” Trible wrote. “Black
lives matter to me and always have and always will.”

In his letter to Dubuisson, Trible says that his previous message “did not adequately and
appropriately express” his reactions to the death of George Floyd in Minneapolis, for
which four police officers are charged. Trible calls for “deep and systemic change” in re-
sponse to the death of Floyd and others.

Trible says that he asked administrators to plan a series of conversations for when campus
reopens involving students, alumni, faculty and staff to “more fully understand the strug-
gles of people of color and seek ways to bring about change.” He said he plans to partici-
pate.

Dubuisson sent a response to Trible on Wednesday as well, saying that he appreciates his
“genuine response” and “ability to self-evaluate the message that your previous email
conveyed.”

He goes on to say that he is happy to hear that Trible acknowledges racial disparities in the
country and that the CNU community can play a role in securing a different future.

“T look forward to this discussion being held when the campus is safe to reopen, and the
work we can all do together to make a positive change,” Dubuisson wrote. “Actions will al-
ways speak louder than words and adding your name to our list is a good first step.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200604/page/1/textview 4/1
