2020. 6. 18. PROTEST SHUTS DOWN I-64

PROTEST SHUTS DOWN I-64

Daily Press - 30 May 2020 - 1 - BY JESSICA NOLTE Staff writer

Black Lives Matter 757 sends message after Minn. death

 

“T can’t breathe.”

Local activists from Black Lives Matter 757 shut down Interstate 64 on Friday night
protesting the death of George Floyd, a handcuffed black man who pleaded for air as a
white Minnesota police officer knelt on his neck.

“This is a message that it’s not open season on African Americans and black and brown
people in the United States (of) America,” said Aubrey Japharii Jones, president of Black
Lives Matter 757. “This is our time to take back our community.”

Protests began at 7:57 p.m. at Fort Monroe in Hampton and Martin Luther King Park in
Norfolk.

The Hampton group of protesters marched onto the interstate with the intent to close the
Hampton Roads Bridge-Tunnel for nine minutes — the length of time court documents
say the officer had his knee on Floyd’s neck, according to an ABC News report.

The interstate closures started around 8:36 p.m. and the interstate remained closed nearly
an hour later.

“‘We’re out here to let them know that black lives matter — not just black lives, but all
lives,” protester Kayla Taylor said.

“But all lives won’t matter until black lives matter,” Makaila Murphy added.

Taylor said shutting down the interstate was a chance to “say what I want to say,” adding
that she was prepared to stand outside and protest all night.

“White supremacy is a disease,” Murphy said.

Jones said there’s a tendency to “overpolice” black and brown people by camping outside
their homes or searching them when they’re pulled over for a broken taillight or expired
inspection sticker.

“We're tired of, even here locally, the harassment by different law enforcement agencies.
Some kind of have a grip on it, but some don’t,” Jones said.

He said the group wants to organize sit-down conversations with police chiefs across
Hampton Roads, adding that the group has previously had conversations with local law
enforcement.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200530/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 18. PROTEST SHUTS DOWN I-64

Jones said they didn’t reach out to the police chiefs about the conversations while organiz-
ing the protests. Friday night was about “standing in solidarity with the rest of the country
when it comes to police brutality,” he said.

Derek Chauvin, 44, was charged Friday with third-degree murder and second-degree
manslaughter in Floyd’s death, which happened Monday, according to an Associated Press
report. Chauvin and the other officers at the scene were fired Tuesday.

The activists said that the third

degree murder charge was not enough and echoed calls for Chauvin to be charged with
first-degree murder.

Jones said the group wants faster arrests and more convictions in cases like what happened
to Floyd. He said too often officers are just placed on administrative leave.

“People run from the police because they’re scared. With all the things you can see going
on clear as day in the news media, we have a reason to be scared and fear for our lives.”
Police chiefs across Hampton Roads released statements in response to the protests and
death in Minneapolis.

“There was no need for that activity, for that use of force and there’s no excuse for it. What
I saw was simply murder,” said Norfolk Police Chief Larry Boone in a Thursday interview
with WVEC.

Portsmouth Police Chief Angela Greene sent an email Friday to all members of the police
department reminding them that she expects Portsmouth officers to hold each other ac-
countable for their actions.

“T need you all to remember our main duty of being a police officer — the preservation of
life!” Greene said. “All of our training and department policies are guiding principles for
the most important role of our chosen profession — protect and preserve life!”

She said the training division is amending an in-service program and developing training
to reinforce policies and expectations for officers.

The description of Floyd’s arrest — his movement restricted with a knee on his neck — is a
technique forbidden by police departments across the country, including Virginia Beach,
interim Chief Tony Zucaro said in a Thursday statement. He said the parts of the video he
saw of the arrest were disturbing.

“The incident in Minneapolis further highlights the racial sensitivities we must continue
to improve upon throughout our country, the actions of those officers involved should be
considered disturbing regardless of the race, gender, or ethnicity of the person who was
handcuffed and being subdued on the ground,” Zucaro wrote.

In a Thursday statement, Hampton Police Chief Terry Sult said the Hampton Police Divi-
sion is committed to “the pursuit of fair and equitable justice in our city.”

He called Floyd’s death an isolated incident, but said it creates a ripple effect across the
nation and will have a negative effect on the perception of police across the country in-
cluding in Hampton.

“Professional policing cannot tolerate and must continue to condemn the abuse of any cit-
izen, no matter their race,” Sult said.

Newport News Police Chief Steve Drew said he sent a video statement to all officers in his
department and Thursday he released a statement to the community.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200530/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 18. PROTEST SHUTS DOWN I-64

Drew said law enforcement would need to strive to do better.

“What happened in Minneapolis will have an effect on law enforcement,” Drew said. “It
will make us all take a second look at what we’re doing.”

“The incident in Minneapolis further highlights the racial sensitivities we must continue
to improve upon throughout our country.”

— Tony Zucaro, Interim Chief of Police

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200530/page/1/textview 3/3
