2020. 6. 18. DOMINION LAYS FOUNDATION FOR OFFSHORE WIND

DOMINION LAYS FOUNDATION FOR OFFSHORE WIND

Daily Press - 4 Jun 2020: 1: By Dave Ress Staff writer

Dominion Energy has set down foundations for its twounit offshore wind turbine project in
deep waters, 27 miles off the Virginia Beach shore.

It marks a key step in its push into offshore wind power.

The electric company expects to erect the 600-foot-tall turbines themselves later this
month. They’re slated to begin generating enough power for 3,000 homes by the end of the
year.

The aim of Dominion’s now-22-month-old, $300 million pilot project is to set the stage
for what’s likely to be a multibillion-dollar push into largescale wind-powered electric
generation in the same waters.

Dominion’s contractors set down the first turbine foundation on the ocean floor, 80 feet
below the surface, on May 25. They set down the second May 30.

The vessel that did the work is now on its way back to Nova Scotia to fetch the towers and
turbine components. When it

returns later this month, it will position itself next to the turbine foundations, let down
long, strong steel legs to the ocean bottom, and jack up its hull and crane above the waves
so it can safely erect the 40-story-tall wind turbines.

Eventually, Dominion would like to stage towers and components for the larger, 220-tur-
bine wind farm it wants to build off the the Virginia Beach shore in Hampton Roads.

But a century-old law, the Jones Act, says carrying the turbine towers and parts from a U.S.
port to any point on or in U.S. waters has to be done by a U.S.-flagged vessel. At the mo-
ment, there are none — which is why Dominion turned the Voleau-Vent,

a vessel designed for erecting wind turbines that is registered in landlocked Luxembourg.
The Vole-au-Vent’s Luxembourg red-white-and-blue horizontally-striped flag is why the
two pilot project turbines are staged in Nova Scotia, 840 miles away.

Dominion is exploring options for a vessel that could shuttle between a Hampton Roads
staging area and the wind farm area, spokesman Jeremy Slayton said.

The company believes Hampton Roads’ port, with its deep shipping channels and experi-
enced maritime workforce, makes it an ideal anchor for a U.S.-based supply chain for its
offshore wind farm and ultimately to other U.S. offshore wind facilities.

“We are exploring our options to be Jones Act compliant on the commercial offshore wind
project. A U.S.-based, Jones Act compliant installation vessel could be a solution,” Slayton
said.

Dominion is betting big on offshore wind. Last year, it decided not to wait for operating re-
sults from the two-turbine pilot project before committing to erect the 220 turbines off
Virginia Beach, beginning in 2024. They should generate enough electricity to power
650,000 homes when the wind is blowing steadily. The company says it would be the
largest such operation in the United States.

The company’s latest long-term plan, filed with the State Corporation Commission last
month, calls for even more offshore wind turbines — double the 220turbine plan. All in all,

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200604/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. DOMINION LAYS FOUNDATION FOR OFFSHORE WIND

Dominion hopes to eventually generate 5,112 megawatts of electricity from offshore tur-
bines, enough to power 1.3 million homes.

This spring, Dominion hired two vessels — the M/V Sarah Bordelon and M/V Marcelle
Bordelon — to conduct studies in the 112,800-acre area where it will erect the 220 tur-
bines. They’ll provide the company with the geological, biological, and oceanographic data
needed for planning and construction of those generators.

While Dominion’s wind project will meet policy goals set out in the Virginia Clean Econ-
omy Act that the General Assembly enacted this year, the company still needs to win per-
mits and regulatory approvals from the U.S. Bureau of Ocean Energy Management and the
Virginia State Corporation Commission.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200604/page/1/textview 2/2
