2020. 6. 18. When ‘Woo Woo’ was found alive after published report of his death

When ‘Woo Woo’ was found alive after published report of his
death

Remembering the day in 1987 superfan Ronnie ‘Woo Woo’ Wickers was dis-
covered alive — and delivering pizzas in a Chicago Cubs uniform — aftera
published report of his death

Daily Southtown - 28 May 2020 - 1 - Paul Sullivan

Remembering the day in 1987, when superfan Ronnie “Woo Woo” Wickers was discovered
alive — and delivering pizzas in a Chicago Cubs uniform — after a published report of his
death. Now, what will he do once baseball returns?

 

   

 

While harking back to the great moments in sports is a great way to pass the time during
this lull in action, I prefer to flashback to not-so-classic moments that mostly areforgot-
ten for one reason or another.

Here’s a recap of when Cubs fan Ronnie Woo Woo” Wickers was discovered alive on May
28, 1987, after rumors of his untimely death.

His last public appearance before baseball shut down came in late February.

The man known as Ronnie “Woo Woo” gathered with a crowd outside the Northwest Side
home of Rod Blagojevich after the disgraced ex- governor of Illinois returned home from
prison.

“The obsequious Ronnie

“Woo Woo” Wickers made an appearance in his full customized Cubs uniform, an homage
to Blagojevich's beloved baseball team,” the Tribune reported.

We have not heard hide nor woo from Wickers since that day,

and some might be wondering what the longtime Cubs fan will do if baseball returns to
Wrigley Field in July with no fans allowed.

In other words, if a woo falls outside a ballpark and no one is there to hear it, does it make
a sound?

Fortunately I was able to track down Wickers last week on the North Side, where the 78-
yearold — clad in a Cubs mask and

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200528/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 18. When ‘Woo Woo’ was found alive after published report of his death

wearing his ubiquitous pinstriped Cubs uniform — said he was feeling fine and hoping the
season is canceled.

“The players' health is more important,” Wickers said. “It's better to call it off and come
back next year.”

Wickers knows a person's health is the only thing that matters. This week marks the 33rd
anniversary of the greatest story of his life — a return from

the dead.

For those unaware of the Wickers legend, he began showing up in the Wrigley Field
bleachers in the late 1960s and became famous for chanting “Cubs, Woo!” at ear-piercing
levels.

That's all it took. It's Chicago. At first he mostly served as an annoyance to opposing out-
field

ers, some of whom threw baseballs at him during batting practice. Wickers was relatively
harmless and well-known only to those who frequented the bleachers.

“The best way to appreciate Ronnie is when he's about 100 feet away and not in your ear,”
Hall of Famer and former White Sox owner Bill Veeck told me in 1983.

But over the years Wickers became a “Zelig” -like figure who showed up seemingly every-
where, including at former Mayor Jane Byrne's funeral in 2014 , where he reportedly su-
pervised her memorial book.

“An only-in-Chicago character standing honor guard for another,” Tribune reporter Ron
Grossman wrote.

Some of the stories are so bizarre they seem hard to believe. In 1999, Wickers was arrested
on a noise complaint in Schaumburg when his late-night “wooing” off an apartment bal-
cony during a friend's party disturbed neighbors. The police report used his alias, “Ronnie
Woo Woo,” and stated Wickers “yelled names of Chicago Cubs baseball players followed by
a ‘woo woo' sound from the balcony.” Wickers later claimed a Sox fan called the cops.
Naturally, Wickers is not beloved by everyone, including many Cubs and Sox fans who
cringe as the Chicago media's obsession with all things woo. In

2000, Sun-Times columnist Rick Telander led a fundraising effort to get Wickers some
new teeth. He has been featured on Howard Stern's radio show and appeared on “Jimmy
Kimmel Live!”

But when Wickers vanished from the scene in the first two months of the 1987 season, his
absence from Wrigley created a stir.

“Cubs ‘Woo' man vanishes,” read a Sun-Times headline, along with the subhead: “Misses
first game in 17 yrs. amid murder rumor.”

“T heard he was beaten to death,” Cubs outfielder

Gary “Sarge” Matthews told the Sun-Times. “The players were all talking about it. He's a
celebrity.”

The murder rumor gained traction after it was spread on the radio. “Who killed ‘Woo' ”
was a question that needed to be solved.

But, as it turned out, there was no crime. Wickers had simply taken a job at a North Side
pizza restaurant and couldn't attend the games. A caller to Jonathon Brandmeier's popular
radio show revealed the truth, and later that day Tribune sports editor Gary Dretzka as-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200528/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 18. When ‘Woo Woo’ was found alive after published report of his death

signed me the task of interviewing Wickers and getting him inside Tribune Tower for pho-
tographic evidence.

I ordered six large pizzas and asked for Wickers to personally deliver them to the Tower.
With the newsroom on deadline, Wickers marched in yelling: “I'm alive, woo! I'm alive,
woo!” Reporters stopped what they were doing and stared at this strange man in a Cubs
jersey. Some gave him an ovation as the night editor in charge of getting the paper out
shook his head in disgust.

We whisked Wickers into the photo lab for some shots, and on May 29 ran a photo along-
side a sports brief headlined: “Ronnie's — woo! — just — woo! — fine.”

The Tribune story began: “What do Mark Twain and locally infamous bleacherite Ronnie
“Woo!” Wickers have in common?” Both the noted author and the man who made the
word “Woo!” a regular part of bleacher bums' vocabularies lived long enough to read of
their untimely deaths in the newspapers.”

Wickers' resurrection from the dead significantly boosted his profile. For better or worse
he has been a fixture in Chicago since, even as his voice eventually gave out and the wooing
slowed down.

Without baseball games to attend at Wrigley, it could be a rough summer for Ronnie Woo
Woo.

Fortunately he still has his health — and his teeth.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200528/page/1/textview 3/3
