2020. 6. 18. Dixmoor, 2 officers facing assault suit

Dixmoor, 2 officers facing assault suit

Two men allege they were victims of excessive force, false arrest and mali-
cious prosecution

Daily Southtown - 11 Jun 2020 - 1 - By Zak Koeske zkoeske@tribpub.com

A Dixmoor police commander charged earlier this year with battering a 66-year-old
woman inside the village’s police station is now being sued over a separate force incident
at the station.

a

Two men from Markham claim they were assaulted by Cmdr. Ronald Burge Jr. and then
falsely arrested after visiting the police station to contest a pair of tickets in 2018, accord-
ing to a lawsuit filed last week in federal court.

Burge Jr., the 31-year-old son of Dixmoor’s police chief, allegedly socked one man in the
face while gripping handcuffs and yanked the other around the room by his neck before
pressing him against a wall, the suit alleges.

Police filed criminal charges against both men, but their cases were later dismissed, ac-
cording to the suit.

On Friday, the men jointly filed a suit against the village of Dixmoor, Burge Jr., and Jose
Villegas, another officer who was allegedly present.

Ramon Terry, 49, and his nephew Sydney Reed, 37, allege they were victims of excessive
force, false arrest and malicious prosecution, and seek unspecified compensatory and
punitive damages.

Police Chief Ronald Burge Sr., the father of the accused officer, said Wednesday he hadn’t
been aware of the lawsuit and couldn’t comment on its claims.

Burge Jr. has been on paid administrative leave since January, when he was charged with
aggravated battery and official misconduct for allegedly dragging a 125-pound grand-
mother into the village’s police station last October and repeatedly slamming her face off a
wall.

Terry and Reed claim their altercation with Burge Jr. occurred about 10 months prior to
that incident, on Dec. 29, 2018, when they showed up at the Dixmoor police station to
complain about parking and public nuisance tickets Burge Jr. had written Terry “without
cause or justification,” according to the suit.

Burge Jr., who met the men inside the station, became incensed when they asked to speak
with another officer to complain about his conduct, the suit alleges.

While clenching a pair of handcuffs in his fist, Burge Jr. swung at Terry and the metal cuffs
connected with his cheek, according to the suit.

The officer then grabbed Reed by the neck, pulled him around the room and pushed him up
against a wall, the suit alleges.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/2020061 1/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. Dixmoor, 2 officers facing assault suit

Villegas, who witnessed the confrontation but did nothing to stop it, then trained his stun
gun on both men as Burge Jr. handcuffed them, according to the suit.

Neither man resisted arrest, the suit claims.

Terry, who was charged with assault, and Reed, who was charged with resisting/ obstruct-
ing a peace officer, were held overnight and released on their own recognizance the fol-
lowing day, according to the suit.

Police had Terry’s car towed from in front of the Police Department while he was in cus-
tody, the suit claims.

He was forced to incur fees to recover his vehicle and use paid time off work to attend court
hearings over the course of the next year, according to the suit.

Reed, who had been on probation at the time of the incident, was required to attend a six-
week anger management course and had his probation regime intensified, the suit claims.
Prosecutors ultimately dropped the charges against both men in January, a couple weeks
after Burge Jr. was arrested in the other case.

Richard Dvorak, whose law firm represents Terry and Reed, said prosecutors did not pro-
vide a reason for the dismissal of their cases.

“Dixmoor has to clean house,” the attorney said in a statement Wednesday. “Its police de-
partment has serious problems from the Chief, to his son, and on down.”

Earlier this year, Dvorak filed a suit against Dixmoor, both Burges, Villegas and four other
village police officers that alleges the police chief orchestrated an intimidation and retalia-
tion campaign against two trustees and their associates after they raised concerns about
unauthorized and unwarranted salary payments the mayor, chief and his officers allegedly
were receiving.

Burge Sr. has denied the claim.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/2020061 1/page/1/textview 2/2
