2020. 6. 18. CONFEDERATE MONUMENT AT A TIPPING POINT

CONFEDERATE MONUMENT AT A TIPPING POINT

Daily Press - 11 Jun 2020 - 1 - By Ana Ley and Saleen Martin Staff writers

PORTSMOUTH — Demonstrators beheaded the four Confederate statues before pulling
one down using a tow rope Wednesday night at the Portsmouth Confederate monument as
police watched.

   
 

A protester was injured as the statue fell, hitting him on the head. Louie Gibbs, vice presi-
dent of the Portsmouth NAACP, said the man, who was in his 30s, lost consciousness. The
man was later seen with his head cut open. He was transported to the hospital.

Protesters started trying to tear one of the statues down around 8:20 p.m., but the rope
they were using snapped.

Using bolt cutters, one demonstrator knocked a rifle off of the statue. The dedication
marker and plaque were also taken down. Later, they knocked the heads off of all

four of the figures.

The protesters gave a sword and rifle they ripped from the monument to 73-year-old Viet-
nam veteran John Hooks. Hooks was born in Portsmouth but has moved around over the
years.

“T’m a mixed bag of emotions,” he said after someone handed him a piece of the monu-
ment. “This is where they sold us into slavery.”

Hooks said Wednesday he noticed white , black and Asian people protesting together.
“You’ve kept your foot on our neck for 401 damn years. When are you going to get the hell
off?” Hooks said.

Demonstrators, frustrated by the Portsmouth City Council’s decision to put off moving the
monument, switched to throwing bricks from the post that held the plaque they pulled
down. They worked to dismantle the monument one piece at a time.

Then someone lit a flag on fire and tied it to the monument.

The monument sits at a site where slaves used to be punished on a whipping post, Cassan-
dra Newby-Alexander, a Norfolk State University history professor, told The Virginian-Pi-
lot in 2017.

Protesters started spray painting the monument in the afternoon after Portsmouth NAACP

President James Boyd and one of his vice presidents, Gibbs, were arrested and charged
https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/202006 11 /page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 18. CONFEDERATE MONUMENT AT A TIPPING POINT

with trespassing. Boyd and Gibbs were released about 30 minutes later on summons, ac-
cording to defense attorney Don Scott, who also serves as a state delegate representing the
8oth District. A police spokeswoman confirmed the charges.

The monument was covered with the letters “BLM” — black lives matter — written in
black, green and red spray paint along with the name of George Floyd, a black man who
pleaded for help as a white police officer knelt on his neck for nearly nine minutes in Min-
neapolis last month. His death has sparked protests across the country.

“No curse words,” several people yelled to those with the spray paint cans as police offi-
cers watched.

Around 4 p.m., some demonstrators started painting “Black Lives Matter” in large yellow
letters on the ground in front of the monument. As the crowd grew around 8 p.m., a
demonstrator dumped a bucket of yellow paint on one of the figures on the monument and
a few people threw water bottles at it.

The Portsmouth City Council held a virtual meeting at 5 p.m. Wednesday to discuss the
monument and the day’s events. The meeting was scheduled before the publicized Remove
the Stain rally was scheduled to begin at 7:57 p.m. at the monument, located near the in-
tersection of Court and High streets. At the meeting, they put off a debate about what to do
with the monument until next month.

Nate Whitaker, 18, was at the monument in the afternoon. He said it has no place in a city
that is predominately black, and in fact, it has no place in any city.

“It represents hate,” said Whitaker, who went to I.C. Norcom High School and is headed to
Morehouse College to study cinema and African American studies.

Former Councilman Mark Whitaker, Nate Whitaker’s father, said he raised the issue of re-
moving the monument at a June 23, 2015, City Council meeting.

“My sentiment hasn’t changed. I’ve received a lot of criticism over it, but it’s a symbol that
represents an ideology of white supremacy,” Mark Whitaker said. “It really speaks to the
consciousness of a city and of a people that would allow such an image of hate to continue
to stand all these years.”

Boyd and Gibbs were arrested in the wake of another protest Tuesday night, where demon-
strators placed bags and tarps over parts of the monument and left a message in front of
the statue denouncing police brutality and systemic racism.

Video of the initial confrontation posted on Facebook showed Boyd and Gibbs standing in-
side the monument’s fence speaking with officers. They said they had previously received
permission from city officials.

The woman narrating the video said Portsmouth mayoral candidate Cliff Page called the
police and asked them to respond.

After several minutes, officers approached Boyd and Gibbs, placed them in handcuffs and
walked them to waiting patrol vehicles.

Later in an interview with a Virginian-Pilot reporter, Page said he wants the monument to
remain in its place.

“T don’t want it moved, I don’t want anything but staying here,” he said.

Hannah Iverson, of Portsmouth, said that her family fought for the Confederacy, but she
doesn’t support keeping a monument. She said it belong in museums and history books,

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/202006 11 /page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 18. CONFEDERATE MONUMENT AT A TIPPING POINT

“not in our streets.”

Throughout the day, several people came to argue with protesters about the monument.
Two city workers came out to the monument during the protest Wednesday afternoon to
install red metal no trespassing signs.

As the protesters watched, state Sen. Louise Lucas came out and complained about the ar-
rest of Boyd and Gibbs.

“They can’t arrest them for going over to city property,” she said, “They should not be ar-
resting them.”

Earlier in the day, a police department spokeswoman said protesters went to the monu-
ment Tuesday night and “chalked an outline of a body on the ground with the words ‘I
can’t breathe.’” The message alluded to the final words of Floyd as the police officer knelt
on his neck.

Efforts to remove the monument from prominent view have been the subject of intense
debate for years in Portsmouth. The conversation reached a boiling point three years ago
after a white supremacist rally in Charlottesville, where James Alex Fields Jr. drove a car
into a crowd of people — killing one person.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/202006 11 /page/1/textview 3/3
