2020. 6. 18. Family sues nursing home

Family sues nursing home
Alleges negligence by Bridgeview Health Care Center in virus death

Daily Southtown « 8 Jun 2020 - 1 - By Mike Nolan

The family of an 81-year-old man whose death in early April was attributed partly to
COVID-19 has sued the Bridgeview nursing home where he had been living.

  

 

The wrongful death complaint, filed Wednesday in Cook County Circuit Court on behalf of
James Zbonski, alleges gross negligence on the part of administrators and staff at
Bridgeview Health Care Center, 8100 S. Harlem Ave.

The Burbank man died April 6 at Advocate Christ Medical Center in Oak Lawn, with his
death attributed to COVID-19 along with acute respiratory failure and pneumonia, accord-
ing to the lawsuit, which seeks damages in excess of $50,000.

In a statement Friday, Martha Peck, administrator of Bridgeview Health Care, said it had
received a copy of the lawsuit and is reviewing the allegations, but could not comment on
the specifics.

“Once the facts come out in court, we are confident they will show the tireless work we
have put into keeping our vulnerable resident population safe from this pandemic,” Peck
said.

The facility reported 34 cases of the virus and 15 deaths connected to COVID-19 to state of-
ficials as of May 29, according to the Illinois Department of Public Health.

The lawsuit alleges the rehab center failed to monitor patients and staff for symptoms of
the virus, and didn’t properly isolate patients who showed symptoms.

The lawsuit alleges that Zbonski’s roommate at the health care center had exhibited
symptoms of the virus and died just days before Zbonski. The complaint was filed by the
Chicago firm Levin & Perconti, which concentrates its practice, among other areas, on
nursing home abuse and neglect.

Zbonski’s death was a “byproduct of years, if not decades, of the nursing home’s misman-
agement, misallocation of resources and understaffing,” the complaint alleges.

The family says that although facility administrators were aware that residents and staff
were either symptomatic or had tested positive for the virus, staff lacked necessary protec-
tive equipment.

Figures released Thursday by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services show that
more than 7,000 workers in long-term care facilities in Illinois have likely been infected
with the virus, and many facilities reporting they are running low on protective gear.

Of Illinois facilities reporting to Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, 23% said they
were short on nursing staff and 27% said they were short on aides.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200608/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. Family sues nursing home

As of the end of last month, the state’s long-term care facilities, which include traditional
nursing

homes and assisted living centers, had reported a cumulative 2,700 deaths related to
COVID-19, which includes fatalities among patients and staff but doesn’t specify the num-
ber of each, according to the state health department.

Zbonski’s family notes, and state records confirm, that Bridgeview Health Care has been
cited numerous times in recent years by state health officials for not properly disinfecting
medical equipment and not developing and implementing infection control measures.

In a mid-April, a COVID-19 facility review by Medicare and Medicaid inspectors found that
the center “failed to follow practices to contain the spread of COVID-19 by proper use of
personal protective equipment and proper handling of clean and soiled linen.”

Bridgeview Health Care “did not exercise reasonable and due care and the level of diligence
and competence required of a long-term skilled nursing care facility” in the treatment of
patients, and failed to implement infection control and prevention measures in violation of
the Illinois Nursing Home Care Act, according to the complaint.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200608/page/1/textview 2/2
