2020. 6. 18. Bevy of cicadas creating a buzz, but in four years even more will be back

Bevy of cicadas creating a buzz, but in four years even more
will be back

Daily Southtown - 8 Jun 2020 - 1 - Paul Eisenberg Landmarks

If you predicted a plague of locusts would be next up in what has been an eventful year, you
were wrong.

   

They’re cicadas, not locusts, and their arrival was part of a regularly scheduled rotation.
This year’s early summer massive insect visitation is the emergence of a subbrood. While
Emergence

of a Subbrood sounds somewhat sinister and may have been the name of a1990s metal
band, these bugs don’t pose much of a threat to people, plants or animals.

And if you think there’s a lot of them this year, just wait until 2024, said Nancy Kreith, a
University of Illinois Extension horticulture educator based in Matteson.

“They’re predicting that brood to be the largest,” she said, noting that this year’s arrivals
are just a fraction of what we’ll see in four years.

According to a cicada report mapping project called Cicada Safari hosted by Mount St.
Joseph University in Cincinnati, Ohio,

Southland hotspots for cicadas appear to be Homewood, with 53 reports, and Frankfort,
with 33 reports of the bugs as of Friday afternoon. The online map at cicadamap.msj.edu
also showed Oak Forest with 14 reports and the Palos area with 16 reports.

While annual dog days cicadas appear each year, filling the late summer air with their
mating call buzz, the bugs emerging from the ground now have spent the last 17 years un-
derground gnawing on tree roots.

That puts them among the world’s longest-living insects, though they just get to spend a
few short weeks out in the open

air.

Besides their early summer emergence, they also differ from annual cicadas a bit in ap-
pearance, with notable bright red eyes and orange highlights on their wings, while the ev-
ery-year cicadas are more green in general with black eyes.

Kreith remembered previous swarms, such as one in 1990 in which “Chicagoans were us-
ing snow shovels to clear them off their driveway,” as well as the last time the main brood
emerged back in 2007.

“T was an intern with Extension that year, and we were so inundated in the Chicago office
with calls,” she said. “People were wanting to know when they’re going to emerge because
maybe they were having wedding in June.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200608/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. Bevy of cicadas creating a buzz, but in four years even more will be back

“Ts this noise going to cause a ruckus?”

The short answer was yes.

“The sound is more of a nuisance,” she said, “but scientists and academia are really in-
trigued by it. That’s why we try to tell people to try to embrace it. It’s very interesting if
you listen to the variations on their calls.”

Besides the buzzy mating call, which can become defining at the height of the emergence
of the males, there’s also a distress call, which kind of sounds like a science fiction raygun
effect from the 1950s.

Kreith said the bugs are using their muscles and organs to create the sounds, but their
wings are designed to amplify it.

“It’s like beating on a drum,” she said.

The first sign they’re on the way is when they leave behind their exoskeletons, their form
better suited to life underground. If you catch them shedding their old form, it’s really in-
teresting to see, Kreith said, as they come out completely white except for their red eyes
and orange wings. They gradually darken in color as they climb into trees where they can
send out their mating calls.

Those first arrivals, the noisy ones, all are males,

Kreith said, and their cacophonous chorus should last two to three weeks, at which point
the females arrive.

“The sound will be gone by late June at latest, then we’ll see the minor damage being
done,” Kreith said.

It’s the females who can do minor damage to trees.

“They lay their eggs in smaller branches,” she said, ” usually under a quarter inch in diam-
eter.”

Those branches then generally die off and fall to the ground, where eggs can hatch and
new cicadas can make their way to a 17-year spell of munching on roots.

Most trees will suffer minor damage, though brand new saplings, anything with a trunk
diameter of at least 2.5 inches, could be in danger and Extension recommends covering
them for a few weeks with netting.

While the brood living in the Chicago area is one of the largest in the nation, specific areas
may be more or less affected. Some of that was the result of conditions long ago, when
natural firebreaks such as rivers and streams kept prairie fires from consuming trees,
leading to historically wooded areas that would be conducive to cicada lifestyles, Kreith
said.

A Field Museum study in the 1950s showed some wooded floodplain areas of Chicago pro-
duced more than 1.5 million cicadas per acre, while upland areas produced much less,
around 100,000 per acre, she said.

That’s still a lot.

And it makes for another unusual element in what’s been an unusual year so far.

But this element can be enjoyable if you let it, Kreith said, especially for those who use it as
an opportunity to do some citizen science by getting involved with Cicada Safari at magici-
cada.org/magicicada /report.

“It doesn’t last too long, and they’re pretty interesting,” she said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200608/page/1/textview 2/2
