2020. 6. 18. Glimpse of normalcy

Glimpse of normalcy
Andrew High School grads receive a drive-thru ceremony

Daily Southtown « 8 Jun 2020 - 1 - By Jesse Wright

Right on schedule Friday, some 550 Victor J. Andrew High School students, clad in gradua-
tion gowns and mortar boards, officially ended their time at the Tinley Park high school
most of them hadn’t been to in months.

 

   
 

a

Following stay-at-home orders since March, teachers wrapped up the school year through
distance learning.

For most of the spring, sports teams didn’t play, clubs didn’t meet, prom was out. But
school officials wanted to do something to mark the end their students’ public school ca-
reers and so, all afternoon Friday and into the evening, cars snaked through the parking
lot, teachers waving and cheering for students along the way.

When cars crawled to the front of the doors of the campus, parents or relatives would let
the student out for a quick trip across a makeshift stage and a photo with school officials.
Science teacher Dana Birch said she’s been attending graduations for 15 years, and she’s
glad they had it, even if it was a drive-thru ceremony. She said any celebration, any cause
to get out of the house, dress up and have fun after years of school and months of quaran-
tine was welcome.

“Honestly, it’s all about the kids,” she said. “It’s not about the pomp and circumstances,
and I think that’s important.”

Principal Robert Nolting said he considered several options before landing on the drive
through ceremony. The school could have just mailed out diplomas, held an online cere-
mony or a series of small, socially distanced ceremonies.

“Honestly, it’s all about the kids.

It’s not about the pomp and circumstances, and I think that’s important.”

— Dana Birch, Victor J. Andrew High School science teacher

Nolting said he knew immediately he wanted some kind of a ceremony, and in conversa-
tion with parents and student groups settled on the drive-thru.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200608/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 18. Glimpse of normalcy

Victor J. Andrew wasn’t the only high school in the area with drive-thru ceremonies. Amos
Alonzo Stagg and Carl Sandburg high schools had similar ceremonies, and Nolting said the
idea is generally popular.

“We do have a good network of principals in the suburbs and it seems to be where most
schools seem to be going,” he said. “Everybody’s got a different variety of graduation, but
the drive-thru is the direction the majority seems to be leaning in.”

Even after deciding, a full month prior and as the state laid out a tentative framework for
reopening public events, Nolting said he didn’t want to gamble on a normal ceremony only
to have to cancel it at the last minute.

“If we were to have planned that at the time knowing what we knew, we felt we would be
playing roulette with an event that’s so vital to our community,” Nolting said. “We
couldn’t justify canceling; it is so meaningful to our kids.”

Birch agreed the ceremony is meaningful. Even at the makeshift graduation ceremony, she
saw her students’ emotions from car windows.

“It’s great just to see my students get a little mistyeyed as they pass by,” she said.

The circumstances over the last several months made this year’s ceremony all the more
special, she said. Usually, teachers mark the end of the school year with small celebrations
and seniors spend time saying farewell to their teachers and school friends. Not this year.
“It’s more emotional because we didn’t get that goodbye, like we normally do,” Birch said.
Off to the side of the school, the Kantofsky family, Chris Sr., his wife Marie and Chris Jr.,
watched the procession in a troop carrier, cheering on graduates and their families. Chris
Sr. and his son are members of Veterans Garage, a group that maintains and restores mili-
tary equipment. The younger Chris got to drive the carrier to the ceremony.

“We wanted to make the ceremony as special as possible for him,” his father explained.
He said he was enjoying the ceremony.

“We're glad they did this,” Chris Sr. said. “It’s definitely different but we were hoping they
would do something.”

Chris Jr. said the last few months of high school were stressful being away from the class-
room, away from his friends and with no real sense of normalcy. However, he said he’s
heard from his college they’re planning on having in-person courses in the fall.

“From what they’ve told me, they should be ready to go,” he said. “They’re going to run
some tests and they told me they should be good to go so long as summer classes go well.”
On Friday, Gov. J.B. Pritzker announced schools could reopen for limited in-person educa-
tion for summer courses, though Nolting said it’s still too early to predict what the fall se-
mester will look like.

“TI know a lot of schools are starting to have really deep conversations about what that
would look like,” he said. “Most schools are looking at a Goldilocks plan, developing plans
for what would be the worstcase scenario, the best-case scenario and something in the
middle.”

The best case, of course, would be the end of COVID-19, while the worst case would be an-
other flare-up of the virus and a return to lockdown and e-learning. Some middle solution
depends on a number of factors.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200608/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 18. Glimpse of normalcy

“It depends on school density size, geography and their capabilities with technology,
frankly,” Nolting said. “We haven’t dived down too deep yet but I anticipate that will be
something that once we finish up graduation this week.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200608/page/1/textview 3/3
