2020. 6. 18. COUNCIL CANDIDATE FILING FOR A RECOUNT

COUNCIL CANDIDATE FILING FOR A RECOUNT

Newport News hopeful can now file after a boost from provisional ballots

Daily Press - 27 May 2020 : 1 - By Josh Reyes Staff writer

Cleon Long plans to seek a recount in the election for a Central District seat on Newport
News City Council.

The certified results of the May 19 election show Councilwoman Pat Woodbury won by 56
votes.

Voters in the Central District cast 7,104 ballots for City Council candidates, and the differ-
ence between Woodbury and Long was .7%. To qualify for a recount, the difference needs
to be less than 1%, according to Virginia law.

Long said he is preparing materials to submit to Newport News Circuit Court.

A panel of judges will determine if there will be a recount. If there is a recount, they deter-
mine how it

will be conducted. Long said he wants to have the recount to ensure the person voters
chose is the one serving, whether that’s him or Woodbury.

The election was held May 19, and voters set records for absentee voting submissions in
the weeks leading up to the election, but it was not until May 22, the day the results were
certified, that Long knew he had the option to file for a recount.

A couple hours after the close of polls May 19, the registrar had counted all votes cast at the
polls that day, and Woodbury held a lead of 358 votes. However, more than 4,000 absentee
votes across the city were yet to be counted.

Of those, 2,678 came from the Central District, and those votes favored Long. Early in the
morning of May 20, the state’s election website reported Woodbury held a lead of 75 votes
— based on the numbers reported, the margin would’ve needed to be 71 votes or fewer to
allow for a recount.

However, the candidates knew the numbers could still change. Woodbury and Long each
said the day after the election that they were waiting for the registrar to count provisional
ballots because just a few in favor of Long would trigger the opportunity for a recount.

On Friday, the state’s elections website reported 39 provisional ballots — 29 for Long and
10 for Woodbury — and brought the overall margin to less than 1%.

Some years, there are no provisional ballots counted in elections, but the bump in absentee
voting led to a bump in provisional voting.

Matthew Norcutt, assistant registrar, said most of the provisional ballots were submitted
by voters who requested an absentee ballot but lost it or did not receive it. Those voters
could go to their polling place on election day and fill out a provisional ballot.

Newport News voters are no strangers to recounts. Many voters in the Central District
voted in the 2017 race for the 94th District

House of Delegates seat, which had major implications on the balance of power in the Gen-
eral Assembly.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200527/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. COUNCIL CANDIDATE FILING FOR A RECOUNT
The race between former delegate David Yancey and Del. Shelly Simonds was separated by
10 votes in the certified election results, and the recount resulted in a tie.

Yancey kept his seat and Republicans kept a majority in the House after his name was
picked out of a bowl in a blind draw.

Josh Reyes, 757-247-4692, joreyes@dailypress.com

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200527/page/1/textview 2/2
