2020. 6. 18. Mayor proposes naming courthouse for Walsh

Mayor proposes naming courthouse for Walsh

In a show of nonpartisan support, Bolingbrook’s Claar aims to honor legacy
of Will County leader

Daily Southtown « 5 Jun 2020 - 1 - Ted Slowik

Even in an era of deeply partisan politics, Republicans on Thursday praised Democratic
Will County Executive Larry Walsh, who died Wednesday of cancer at age 72.

“Thad a lot of respect for him,” said Will County Board member Steve Balich, R-Homer
Glen. “We differed in opinion on a lot of things but we were never hostile to each other.”
George Pearson of Monee, chair of the Will County Republican Central Committee, said ina
statement that Walsh was a master at working a room during fundraisers and other events.
“Larry Walsh believed in retail politics,” Pearson said. “He greeted me each time we met
with a firm handshake, a smile and pat to the shoulder. You would not have known we were
on opposite sides of the political aisle, and that is what made him popular with Will County
residents.”

Walsh was poker buddies with former President Barack Obama when the two served in the
Illinois Senate. In February 2016, after Obama addressed the Illinois General Assembly in
Springfield, Walsh and two other former state lawmakers joined Obama for a conversation
about bipartisanship.

“Part of the secret of beating these guys, though, is I would just nurse my beer, and these
guys — you know. So the longer the game went on, the looser their betting got,” Obama
joked with the reporter during the interview.

Walsh publicly apologized in 2008 after Will County sheriff ’s police arrested him near his
Elwood home for driving under the influence of alcohol. He later pleaded guilty to a single
count of drunken driving and was sentenced to supervision.

He was proud of his Irish heritage and supported the Irish American Society of County Will,
an organization that sponsors an annual festival and raises funds for scholarships and
study trips to Ireland.

“We are saddened on a couple different levels,” said Tim Brophy, Will County treasurer
and the society’s executive director. “Larry was a friend and mentor.”

Walsh and his wife, Irene, raised six children. He would often post on social media when
one of his 20 grandchildren

celebrated a birthday.

Walsh was a farmer and lifelong public servant. He was a local school board member and
township supervisor before serving eight years in the state Senate. He was first elected
county executive in 2004.

“He understood the executive form of county government,” said Will County Board mem-
ber Mike Fricilone, R-Homer Glen. “He was always willing to work with us.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200605/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. Mayor proposes naming courthouse for Walsh

The county executive is an elected position, but the job involves administering programs
and policies approved by the county board, Fricilone said. Republicans controlled a major-
ity on the Will County Board for years until the 2018 “blue wave” shifted the political bal-
ance in suburban areas.

Walsh was executive during construction of the county’s $30 million Public Safety Com-
plex that opened in 2017 at Laraway Road and U.S. Route 52 in Joliet. Anew 10-story, $200
million county courthouse is due to open in downtown Joliet later this year.

“Larry was against the building plan but when the board voted to move forward he got on
board,” Fricilone said.

Walsh strongly opposed Kansas City-based NorthPoint’s attempts to build a large business
park in Elwood and Manhattan. Developers of the 1,300-acre project instead approached
the city of Joliet, which approved the project by a 6-3 vote in April.

Walsh advocated for a balanced approach to economic development and supported resi-
dents who raised concerns about increased truck traffic from warehouses diminishing the
quality of life in rural areas of the county.

Walsh sat for an hourlong interview in early 2017, about a month after the inauguration of
President Donald Trump. He blamed then-Gov. Bruce Rauner for the state budget stale-
mate and praised the efforts of Democratic Senate President John Cullerton of Chicago and
Republican Senate Minority Leader Christine Radogno of Lemont to strike a compromise.
“They quietly worked together behind the scenes in a collaborative way to come up witha
plan,” Walsh said. “Everyone doesn’t like everything that’s in there but everybody should
like enough of what’s in there where they can hold their noses and do something.”

Walsh had battled prostate cancer and the illness had kept him from presiding at county
board meetings since last year. He had served in an elected office since 1970. He was a
product of a bygone era in which politicians from opposing ideologies seemed to compro-
mise in order to strike a deal.

Longtime Bolingbrook Mayor Roger Claar, a Republican who hosted a fundraiser for
Trump in 2016, shared a tribute to Walsh on social media that seemed extraordinary in its
praise for a member of an opposing political party.

“In the approximate 184-year history of Will County government I don’t believe there’s
ever been a greater leader, greater individual and nice guy as Larry M. Walsh Sr.,” Claar
wrote.

Claar proposed that the new county courthouse be named in Walsh’s honor and that a
statue of him be placed in front of the building.

“Before an election we would ‘duke it out’ but the day after the election it was immediately
back to crossing the aisle or whatever it took to get the people’s business done,” Claar
wrote.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200605/page/1/textview 2/2
