2020. 6. 18. SMOOTH SAILING NOT ASSURED FOR CRUISE LINES

SMOOTH SAILING NOT ASSURED FOR CRUISE LINES

Daily Press - 11 Jun 2020 - 1 + By Dee-Ann Durbin

Some cruise lines are hoping to set sail later this summer but with images of coronavirus-
ravaged ships still fresh in many minds, the industry could face years of choppy water
ahead.

The global cruise industry expected to carry 32 million passengers and take in $71 billion in
revenue this year. That will fall by at least 50% this year, says Euromonitor International, a
consulting firm. It took the industry three years to recover from the 2009 recession; this
time, it will take longer, Euromonitor analyst Alex Jarman said.

“Unlike the previous downturn, the pandemic has put the safety of cruises into question,”
Jarman said.

Cruise lines stopped sailing in mid-March after several highprofile outbreaks at sea. More
than 600 people fell ill aboard Carnival Corp.’s Diamond Princess while it was quarantined
off the coast of Japan, for example. Fourteen passengers died.

Christina Kerby was trapped aboard a Holland America cruise ship in February after several
ports in Asia refused to allow it to dock.

“T will take a cruise again someday,” said Kerby, of Alameda, California. “Just not anytime
soon.”

Since they stopped sailing, Carnival, Royal Caribbean International and Norwegian Cruise
Line — which control 75% of the market — have furloughed thousands of staff and ob-
tained billions in bank loans to stay afloat. Major cruise companies weren’t eligible for U.S.
government loans because they’ re incorporated overseas.

Norwegian warned of a pos

sible bankruptcy in early May, but then raised $2.2 billion through a sale of stock and debt.
It now says it can withstand a shutdown for as long as 18 months. Smaller operators could
have more trouble, experts say. Virgin Voyages, a new cruise line owned by Richard Bran-
son’s Virgin Group, has twice postponed its first sailing. Virgin Australia — an airline in
which Branson holds a stake — filed for bankruptcy protection in April.

The U.S. Centers for Disease Control has prohibited cruises in U.S. waters through July 24.
Operators in Europe and Asia could sail sooner; some German river cruises resumed last
week. But most big cruise lines are using this time to refine their plans, upgrade their ships
and figure out how to resume safely.

Norwegian says it’s installing medical-grade air filters on its ships and adding medical
staff, for example. Carnival is raising the temperature in its washers and dryers to make
sure napkins and sheets are fully sanitized.

Cruise companies are talking to U.S. regulators, to foreign ports and to each other, said

Brian Salerno, senior vice president for maritime policy at the Cruise Lines International
https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/202006 11 /page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. SMOOTH SAILING NOT ASSURED FOR CRUISE LINES

Association, a trade group that represents 95% of ocean cruise companies. That doesn’t
always happen in the fiercely competitive business.

“A safety failure for one affects them all,” Salerno said

For now, cruise lines are offering big discounts. Brian McLaren, who leads the cruise divi-
sion for the Liberty Travel agency, said it’s common to see 20% discounts or $200 off per

person. McLaren said bookings for 2021 cruises are solid, partly because people with
cruises this spring have been rebooking.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/202006 11 /page/1/textview 2/2
