2020. 6. 18. MORTARBOARD MOTORCADE

MORTARBOARD MOTORCADE

High school graduates in Hampton celebrate success with graduation pa-
rade

Daily Press - 13 Jun 2020 - 1 - By Matt Jones Staff writer

HAMPTON — This is the first — and likely the only — year that a pink stretch Hummer
will be part of Bethel High School's graduation ceremonies.

 

Hundreds of cars, including a few limousines, lined up to participate in a parade Friday
morning at the high school. Graduates leaned out of sunroofs and waved through windows
at their teachers and classmates, a chance to say goodbye.

With the pandemic rendering normal ceremonies impossible, almost every district has
taken a different approach to graduations.

In Hampton, that includes a car parade at each high school, the last of a series of celebra-
tions including a photo shoot at the Hampton Coliseum and a virtual commencement cere-
mony the night before the parade. Bethel’s celebration Friday was just one of four meant to
capture some of the energy of a normal graduation

season.

“Tt’s an important time and you’ve got to make it what it is,” said Olivia Cochrane, a social
studies teacher. “Just know that the rest of your life is still there.”

Teachers, including Cochrane, lined up in full graduation regalia to wave at the cars from
the staff parking lot a little before 11 a.m. Friday.

A few said that it’d been an emotional graduation season, not being able to see their stu-
dents off the usual way.

Barry Davis, also a social studies teacher, said that some of the seniors in his classes this
year also had been in his classes as juniors.

“The fact that they’ve come through this situation shows a lot to their personal
strengths,” Davis said. “They’ve had to deal with the normal stress of being a senior, ev-
erything that happens your senior year of high school, and then dealing with the anxiety of
the national health crisis.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/202006 13/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. MORTARBOARD MOTORCADE

Meanwhile, families and graduates assembled at Bethel Church on Todds Lane. All four of
the parades in Hampton involve routes through neighborhoods near the schools.

At Bethel, the parade drew dozens of family and friends to the corner of Burton Street and
Big Bethel Road.

“There’s so many things they could be down on, and this helps give them that last, uplift-
ing moment where they can be able to see their peers,” said Cindy Boulais, waiting for her
son Brandon to pass by.

Brandon’s grandmother, Susan Mercer, and other family also set up chairs near the George
P. Phenix School sign to watch the cars go by, holding signs with his photo and cheering as
the first graduates passed around 11:15 a.m.

Graduates would keep driving by until about 12:15 p.m.

“This is the year that everybody looks at them, their senior year,” Susan Mercer said.

He has played baseball almost his whole life and was looking forward to his senior year on
Bethel’s baseball team. With that canceled, there wasn’t much for him and his friends to
do. Brandon helped some of his friends get jobs at Autobell while they were out.

On Thursday evening, they tuned into Bethel’s virtual graduation ceremony, which Hamp-
ton City Schools broadcast online.

The virtual ceremonies have featured the regular graduation slate, with speeches from the
valedictorian and salutatorian and greetings from school officials.

But instead of being in the Hampton Coliseum, everyone was on a video call.

“We had no clue what to expect, and I think they did the best that they possibly could,”
Boulais said.

From Burton Street, cars snaked around the school, past the shouting faculty, past the
drum line, around George P. Phenix School behind the high school, past the fireworks set
up on the baseball field.

On the north side of the school, executive principal Ralph Saunders handed diploma jack-
ets to graduates in their cars after their name was announced. Superintendent Jeffery
Smith and school board members cheered on as the cars pulled away.

Graduates will get their actual diplomas mailed to them this month along with a com-
memorative coin and photos they took at the Hampton Coliseum a few weeks ago, when
the district set up stages outside so graduates could get a photo on their school’s stage.
“Tt’s a fun way to get them excited,” Boulais said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/202006 13/page/1/textview 2/2
