2020. 6. 18. THUMBS DOWN

THUMBS DOWN
Some ads withheld over Facebook’s stance on Trump’s posts.

Daily Press - 11 Jun 2020 - 1 - By Tiffany Hsu and Cecilia Kang

Nima Gardideh, the co-founder of a digital advertising agency, has encouraged his clients
to hold back millions in advertising dollars from Facebook.

wy

   

rr

It struck him as “borderline tone-deaf ” to run ads on social media platforms when they
were being used to organize protests against racism and police brutality, he said. And the
money spent on ads might have been wasted because the usual concerns of consumers
seemed not to amount to much at a historic moment.

But there was something else weighing on his mind: Facebook’s hands-off attitude toward
President Donald Trump’s aggressive, misleading posts.

“We harshly disagree with how Facebook has approached this,” said Gardideh, co-founder
of Pearmill, a New York marketing agency with a dozen clients, mostly tech startups. “For
the past couple of years, this problem has become bigger and bigger. These massive plat-
forms have to care about free speech issues to some extent, but Facebook is on the extreme
end of not caring.”

Unlike Twitter and Snap, which have toughened their stances against Trump’s online
statements that contain misinformation or promote violence, Facebook has held firm on
its decision to leave his posts alone. Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook’s chief executive, has de-
fended the policy, despite the resignations of some staff members and public criticism
from current and former employees.

In recent days, many companies have cautiously returned to advertising, after having
pulled back during the height of the pandemic in the United States. But some have decided
not to advertise on Facebook, now that it has become clear that Zuckerberg will give the
president a wide berth.

In late May, the social media companies’ dealings with the president diverged. Twitter
started fact-checking Trump and posted an addendum to a tweet that called for military
action against participants in a protest whom Trump had described as “THUGS.”

“This Tweet violated the Twitter Rules about glorifying violence,” the company said ina
note attached to Trump’s statement.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/202006 11 /page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. THUMBS DOWN

Facebook reacted differently, allowing the same statement to go unflagged.

Around the same time, companies were struggling with how and whether to address the
worldwide demonstrations prompted by the killing of George Floyd, a black man who died
May 25 in Minneapolis after a white police officer pinned him to the ground.

On June 2, in an effort that became known as Blackout Tuesday, many advertisers posted
images of black boxes instead of paid ads, a gesture intended to show support for the
protests.

“They began to realize that all of their messaging was off-target,” said Rishad Tobaccow-
ala, a former advertising executive who is now an author and marketing adviser.
Facebook generates 98% of its revenue through ads. It netted $17.4 billion from advertis-
ing in its most recent quarter. The pandemic has hurt advertising sales in general, and
some companies are still “incredibly challenged,” said Carolyn Everson, Facebook’s vice
president for global marketing solutions. Blackout Tuesday “really had a very significant
role on our platforms,” Everson added, with hundreds of companies pausing their spend-
ing.

Since then, ad revenue has mostly recovered for the company, she said, although several
companies have been slow to return as they adjusted their messaging. Nike, Anheuser-
Busch and others each slashed their daily Facebook and Instagram spending by more than
$100,000 in early June, according to advertising analytics platform Pathmatics.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/202006 11 /page/1/textview 2/2
