2020. 6. 18. RADIO DJ GIVES KIDS THEIR MOMENT TO SHINE ON THE AIR

RADIO DJ GIVES KIDS THEIR MOMENT TO SHINE ON THE
AIR

Eric Worden invites students to help from home on his 93.7 BOB-FM morn-
ing show

Daily Press - 26 May 2020 - 1 - By Sara Gregory Staff writer

NORFOLK — For 46 years as a radio broadcaster, Eric Worden has viewed his job as a plat-
form to bring people together.

    
 

 

roP - ; a

The radio station, even in an age of Spotify and digital music, is a link to others, the “glue”
that can draw a community closer, he said.

Worden’s three children are older, but when the coronavirus pandemic closed schools in
March, he couldn’t stop thinking about how hard it must be for students to lose their nor-
mal routine. That’s when he decided to start inviting them on air to help him DJ his morn-
ing show on Norfolk-based 93.7 BOB-FM.

“T wanted to find a way to interject some kind of positivity into their day,” Worden said.
“Change the day to day from being inside the four walls to kind of

getting outside, at least in your mind.”

Several dozen students have now stepped up as “junior BOB-casters,” usually to introduce
the “9 @ 9” block: nine songs played back-toback, all from the same year. There’s been so
much demand from students to appear on the show that some days Worden does two seg-
ments.

The “9 @ 9” block is usually introduced with a history lesson about life in the year the
songs were released. Worden writes a script that he sends to students, then has them call
the studio so they can record it in advance. He interviews students about their lives and lets
them give a shoutout to friends and teachers they miss and then they read the script. One
of the best parts, he said, has been getting photos and videos from parents showing the
child’s reaction when they hear their segment air on the radio.

News of the segment has spread through word of mouth and families hearing other stu-
dents’ broadcasts. Others asked to participate after a friend did or a teacher encouraged
them.

Lilly Banks, a Norfolk sixth grader at the Ghent School, heard about it from her language
arts teacher, Heidi Huber. Lilly got her chance at broadcasting Friday, one day after her
friend did it. Both her teacher and friend got a shoutout from

Lilly, as did the Ghent School Fighting Suns.

“Thank Bob it’s Friday,” Lilly said to start the segment, before introducing the year: 1988.
https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200526/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. RADIO DJ GIVES KIDS THEIR MOMENT TO SHINE ON THE AIR

With Guns N’ Roses’ “Welcome to the Jungle” playing in the background, Lilly shared Ge-
orge Bush’s win over Michael Dukakis, how NASA resumed the space shuttle program, how
gas cost 91 cents and a movie ticket was just $3.50. Then Axl Rose took it away.

Lilly was most worried that she would cough during the recording, but she didn’t.

“You did it perfect,” Warden told her.

The last two months have been weird not seeing anyone, Lilly said, but at the same time
it’s been nice to spend more time with her younger brother and sister. She gets to see her
teachers and friends twice a week over video and can text with a few friends who have
phones.

Lilly sat in her bedroom to listen when the segment aired, about a half-hour after she’d
called Worden to record it. Elsewhere in the house, her brother listened from the dining
room without pausing his Minecraft game.

“Tt was really cool,” Lilly said. “I was just glad I didn’t stutter too much.”

The Helpers is a feature from The Virginian-Pilot and the Daily Press about people and
groups who are stepping up to help others during the coronavirus pandemic. To read the
other stories in the stories, visit dailypress.com/thehelpers.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200526/page/1/textview 2/2
