2020. 6. 18. UNDER REVIEW

UNDER REVIEW

Daily Press - 10 Jun 2020 - 1 - By Dave Ress Staff writer Dave Ress, 757-247-4535, dress@dailypress.com

Sexual abuse charges against four former Hampton Roads priests are under review by the
Catholic Diocese of Richmond.

    
 

my

Allegations of sexual abuse of Hampton Roads children by four retired or inactive priests
are now under review by the Catholic Diocese of Richmond.

None of the four are serving in active ministry, the diocese said Monday. None have served
in the diocese in recent years.

The diocese has not reached any conclusions about the allegations, though it has informed
civil authorities about them.

The allegations are of abuse at Christ the King Catholic Church and Christ the King Catholic
School in Norfolk in 1986, at St. Paul’s in Portsmouth in the early 1990s and at St. Mary
Star of the Sea at Fort Monroe in the late 1970s.

The priests who are accused are:

William Dinga, Jr., who retired in 1990 and who in addition to serving at Christ the King
served at Saint Jerome and at Saint Vincent de Paul in Newport News, as well as at churches
in

Roanoke, Lynchburg and Richmond. He has vehemently denied the allegations. Prior to
this recent allegation, he did not have permission to exercise any public priestly ministry.
Thomas L. Long, Jr., who took a leave of absence in 1988 after his time at Christ the King
school and has not served in the Richmond Diocese since. His priestly functions had been
suspended before these allegations surfaced.

Joseph Slowik, who in addition to serving at St. Paul’s also served at Church of Saint
Therese in Gloucester. He was removed from public ministry in 2006. When the diocese re-
moved him from the Gloucester church in late 2005, it did not disclose any reason for its
action, the Daily Press reported at the time.

Fr. Eugene Daigle, a redemptorist, or member of the Congregation of the Most Holy
Redeemer (C.Ss.R),who was at St. Marys Star of the Sea in the 1970s, is no longer in active
ministry. The diocese has informed the provincial superior of the Redemptorists of the
Baltimore Province of the allegations.

As part of the Church process regarding the allegations, the Diocesan Review Board will
make recommendations to Bishop Barry Knestout. The bishop will decide an appropriate
response to the allegations based upon the board’s findings.

“While the alleged incidents are from the past, we recognize the pain is still a deep and
present reality for victim survivors of abuse and for their loved ones,” the bishop said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/202006 10/page/1/textview 4/1
