2020. 6. 18. Trump ramps up war on Twitter

Trump ramps up war on Twitter
President ramps up war, signs order on liability protections

Daily Southtown - 29 May 2020 - 1 - By Zeke Miller

President escalated his war on social media companies Thursday, signing an executive or-
der challenging the liability protections that have served as a bedrock for unfettered
speech on the internet.

 

 

WASHINGTON — President Donald Trump escalated his war on social media companies
Thursday, signing an executive order challenging the liability protections that have served
as a bedrock for unfettered speech on the internet.

Still, the move appears to be more about politics than substance, as the president aims to
rally supporters after he lashed out at Twitter for applying fact checks to two of his tweets.
Trump said the fact checks were “editorial decisions” by Twitter and amounted to political
activism. He said it should cost those companies their protection from lawsuits for what is
posted on their platforms.

Trump, who relies on Twitter to verbally flog foes, has long accused the tech giants in the
Silicon Valley of targeting conservatives by fact-checking them or removing their posts.
“We're fed up with it,” Trump said, claiming the order would uphold freedom of speech.

It directs executive branch agencies to ask independent rule-making agencies including
the Federal Communications Commission and the Federal Trade Commission to study
whether they can place new regulations on the companies — though experts express
doubts much can be done without an act of Congress.

Companies like Twitter and Facebook are granted liability protection under Section 230 of
the Communications Decency Act because they are treated as “platforms,” rather than
“publishers,” which can face lawsuits over content.

A similar executive order was previously considered by the administration but shelved over
concerns it couldn’t pass legal muster and that it violated conservative principles on
deregulation and free speech.

“They've had unchecked power to censor, restrict, edit, shape, hide, alter virtually any
form of communication between private citizens or large public audiences,” Trump said of
social media companies as he prepared to sign the order. “There is no precedent in Ameri-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200529/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 18. Trump ramps up war on Twitter

can history for so small a number of corporations to control so large a sphere of human in-
teraction.”

Trump and his campaign reacted after Twitter added a warning phrase to two Trump
tweets that called mail-in ballots “fraudulent” and predicted “mail boxes will be robbed.”
Under the tweets, there’s now a link reading “Get the facts about mail-in ballots” that
guides users to a page with fact checks and news stories about Trump’s unsubstantiated
claims.

Trump accused Twitter of interfering in the 2020 presidential election” and declared “as
president, I will not allow this to happen.”

His campaign manager, Brad Parscale, said Twitter’s “clear political bias” had led the
campaign to pull “all our advertising from Twitter months ago.” Twitter has banned polit-
ical advertising since last November.

Late Wednesday, Twitter CEO Jack Dorsey tweeted, “We’ll continue to point out incorrect
or disputed information about elections globally.”

Dorsey added: “This does not make us an ‘arbiter of truth.’ Our intention is to connect the
dots of conflicting statements and show the information in dispute so people can judge for
themselves.”

But Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg told Fox News that his platform has “a different pol-
icy, I think, than Twitter on this.”

“TI just believe strongly that Facebook shouldn’t be the arbiter of truth of everything that
people say online,” he said.

The president’s critics, meanwhile, scolded the platforms for allowing him to put forth
false or misleading information.

“Donald Trump’s order is plainly illegal,” said Sen.

Ron Wyden, D-Ore. He is “desperately trying to steal for himself the power of the courts
and Congress. All for the ability to spread unfiltered lies.”

Trump’s proposal has multiple, serious legal problems and is unlikely to survive a chal-
lenge, said Matt Schruers, president of the Computer and Communications Industry Asso-
ciation, a Washingtonbased organization that represents computer and internet compa-
nies.

It would also seem to be an assault on the same online freedom that enabled social media
platforms to flourish in the first place — and made them such an effective microphone for
Trump and other politicians.

“The irony that is lost here is that if these protections were to go away social media
services would be far more aggressive in moderating content and terminating accounts,”
Schruers said. “Our vibrant public sphere of discussion would devolve into nothing more
than preapproved soundbites.”

Trump and fellow conservatives have been claiming, for years, that Silicon Valley tech
companies are biased against them. But there is no evidence for this — and while the exec-
utives and many employees of Twitter, Facebook and Google may lean liberal, the compa-
nies have stressed they have no business interest in favoring on political party over the
other.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200529/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 18. Trump ramps up war on Twitter

Even as he and his supporters complain of bias on the platform, Trump has used Twitter to
build a potent following. The president’s account has more than 80 million followers.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200529/page/1/textview 3/3
