2020. 6. 18. IT'S A BIG HIT

IT’S A BIG HIT

Home Run Inn’s suburban Chicago plant meets soaring demand by churn -
ing out nearly 80,000 pizzas a day

Daily Southtown - 28 May 2020 - 1 - By Robert Channick

In early March, Home Run Inn began building up its inventory of frozen pizza at its south-

west suburban plant, as the COVID-19 pandemic began to hit home.

a

    

The family owned company was nonetheless unprepared for the surge in demand, as wor-
ried consumers loaded up on the stay-at-home staple before hunkering down for the fore-
seeable future.

“It was absolutely crazy,” said Nick Perrino, 33, who heads up the frozen pizza division for
Home Run Inn. “The pandemic had people stocking up on frozen pizza, making sure they
had product, just like with toilet paper.”

A 73-year-old pizza empire that grew from a single Chicago tavern, Home Run Inn oper-
ates nine restaurants in the city and suburbs, and a 60,000-square-foot manufacturing
facility in Woodridge. Frozen pizza generates about 75% of the company’s revenue, but
with its restaurants limited to pickup and delivery since March, the balance has shifted
even more dramatically.

Home Run Inn sells frozen pizza in more than 40 states and is the No. 12 brand in sales na-
tionally, according to IRI, a Chicago-based market research firm. It is the No. 1 selling
frozen pizza in the Chicago area.

“If we could make double, we’d be able to sell double,” said Perrino, whose grandfather
began serving pizza at the family’s Little Village tavern in 1947.

In February, the Chicago Cubs announced that Home Run Inn would be the official pizza of
Wrigley Field, a five-year partnership and major revenue opportunity. The baseball season
was postponed March 12.

Home Run Inn went all in on frozen pizza March 16, shifting to a seven-day production
schedule for its 130 line workers. The plant has been churning out about 78,000 frozen
pizzas a day, up about a third from the pre-pandemic operation.

The company has about 500 employees at its restaurants. None have been furloughed or
laid off, with Home Run Inn securing a federal Payroll Protection Program loan last month
to keep them fully employed, despite softer restaurant sales during the pandemic.

About 20 of the restaurant employees have been reassigned to the frozen pizza operation.
“It’s the same process,” Perrino said. “Our frozen pizza is made exactly the same way as in

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200528/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. IT'S A BIG HIT

our restaurants.”

The company closed the plant for a day on

April 6 after two employees tested positive for COVID-19.

When it reopened, new protections were implemented including mandatory masks, in-
creased cleaning schedules and social distancing in the break rooms.

Plant workers received a $2 an hour pay boost and an increase in the number of sick days.
In some cases, line workers are closer than 6 feet, but the protective measures generally
have been successful, with seven cases of COVID-19 across the company and none since
late April, Perrino said.

Manufacturing was backed down to a six-day-a-week schedule in April, when it became
clear the new normal in the pizza business may last for a while and the grueling schedule
was unsustainable, Perrino said. Demand has flattened in recent weeks, enabling Home
Run Inn to resume production on some of its specialty pizzas, such as its classic sausage
margherita.

The company’s popular 6-inch pizzas have been in short supply as well, something that
should change in the coming weeks, Perrino said.

While Illinois and other states are beginning to reopen for business, Perrino said the shift
to frozen pizza may endure for some time, as consumers remain wary of venturing beyond
their freezer for a sausage and pepperoni pie.

“Habits have changed,” Perrino said. “Times are uncertain, the economy is uncertain. But
one thing we do know is that people always need to eat.”

“If we could make double, we’d be able to sell double.” —Nick Perrino, who operates 73-
year-old pizza empire Home Run Inn

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200528/page/1/textview 2/2
