2020. 6. 18. Pritzker marches with hundreds in Matteson

Pritzker marches with hundreds in Matteson

Church organizes event that attracts more than 400

Daily Southtown - 10 Jun 2020 - 1 - BY MIKE NOLAN

Gov. J.B. Pritzker marched Monday with hundreds of people in Matteson who called for
peace and racial harmony in response to the death of George Floyd in Minneapolis.

j ki
Le se a oe

   

1 ie, 8 es |S

Organized by Victory Apostolic Church in that suburb, the event drew more than 400 peo-
ple and included speeches by black elected leaders including Matteson Mayor Sheila
Chalmers-Currin, U.S. Rep. Robin Kelly, Cook County Board President Toni Preckwinkle
and Cook County State’s Attorney Kim Foxx.

Before leading marchers to Matteson’s Unity Bridge that crosses Interstate 57, Pritzker
told the audience that leaders “have to repair the damage that’s been done to black com-
munities around the state” through reinvestment.

Pritzker said too many communities of color had “seen nothing or very little over the
years” in terms of investment in health care and education.

Pritzker said “long-standing systems don’t shift on their own,” and he realizes “my duty
is to be a force for justice, a force for change.”

From a stage set up in the parking lot of the church, the governor shouted “Black Lives
Matter” several times, with the audience applauding and cheering him.

Andrew Singleton, senior pastor of Victory Apostolic Church, said the death of Floyd while
being arrested “has brought us together in protest, in grief, in anger, in pain and in unity.”
A Minneapolis police officer was fired and charged with seconddegree murder in Floyd’s
death, and three other officers were fired and charged with aiding and abetting.
Preckwinkle said those taking part in the march need to make a commitment to work for
change.

“This has to be the struggle of

our lifetime,” she said. “This is something we need to commit our lives to.”

Foxx, the first black woman to lead the Cook County state’s attorney’s office, also de-
scribed the struggle as blacks needing to honor their ancestors.

“This is our moment,” she said. “You cannot drop the baton, you cannot become weary.
The ancestors are counting on you.”

From the church, 20801 Matteson Ave., marchers walked north to the bridge, then west to
Central Avenue and south to Notre Dame Avenue before returning to the church.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/2020061 0/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. Pritzker marches with hundreds in Matteson

The bridge is called Unity Bridge because it helped connect portions of the village sepa-
rated by I-57 and includes a pedestrian/ bike path. It was dedicated in July 2009 in memory
of former Matteson Mayor Mark Stricker, who died in 2008.

DeAndre Taylor, of Matteson, marched with his daughter, Brianna, 8, and said he was
happy so many people attended.

“T think George Floyd’s death has really galvanized a movement of people who want to
make things better,” Taylor said.

He said he hoped that when his daughter grows up “racism is something she just reads
about in history books.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/2020061 0/page/1/textview 2/2
