2020. 6. 18. ‘THE WALK HAS NOT BEEN AS LONG AS THE JOURNEY’

‘THE WALK HAS NOT BEEN AS LONG AS THE JOURNEY’
Protests against police brutality continue in Chesapeake and Hampton

Daily Press - 9 Jun 2020: 1° By Jessica Nolte and Gordon Rago Staff writers

“Black Lives Matter.”

 

“Strong Black Man.” “Husband. Dad. Hero. Legend.”

Those were some of the phrases on T-shirts worn by a group of marchers Monday after-
noon on Las Gaviotas Boulevard in Chesapeake.

The demonstration was part of the March for Racial Justice at The Mount Church, put to-
gether by a newly formed coalition of black pastors, said Bishop Kevin White.

It was one of many protests this week to take a stand against police brutality, and deaths
similar to George Floyd’s. Floyd, a black man, begged for help as a white Minneapolis po-
lice officer knelt on his neck for nearly nine minutes on Memorial Day. Floyd died shortly
after.

The 2-mile march, which started at the church and stopped at City Hall, drew hundreds of
people.

The throng of marchers hoisted signs and chanted as they stretched down Cedar Road, met
by supporters who passed out cold bottles of water and honked their car horns as they
drove in the opposite lane.

They were part of city history

as organizers said it was the largest march since 1971, when a few hundred people marched
against the closure of Crestwood High School, a predominantly black school.

“Chesapeake will never be the same!” White shouted into the massive crowd. “It was a
long walk, but the walk has not been as long as the journey.”

By 6:30 p.m., the march took on a party-like atmosphere on the steps of City Hall, where
speakers blasted music into the crowd and a list of local officials were expected to speak.
Mayor Rick West was there, as well as state Sens. Lionel Spruill and Louise Lucas and U.S.
Reps. Donald McEachin and Bobby Scott.

In the crowd walking was Deborah

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200609/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. ‘THE WALK HAS NOT BEEN AS LONG AS THE JOURNEY’

Brown of Virginia Beach. Mondaymarkedthethirddemonstration in the region she’s been
part of over the last week.

A retired child protective services investigator for Chesapeake, Brown saidher34-year-
oldson, Jerrod,also went out to another protest in VirginiaBeachthisweekendandtexted
herafter:“I’msafe.Itwaselectric !!!! ”

She recalled a question from her former job each time there was a child fatality — “Could
this have been prevented?”

“We have to ask that of all the black men who die,” Brown said.
SylvesterStarkes,aretiredVirginia Beach teacher living in Chesapeake, was also walking
with his adoptive children: Davion, 14, Drevon, 12, and De’ara, 6, who marched with a
heart-shaped sign with a photo of Floyd and the words “black lives matter.”

He wants them to learn that the struggle of being black is real, that

they have to be aware each time when they go outside not to be in a situation that could get
misconstrued because of the color of their skin.

“We want to see change,” Starkes said.

The coalition of black pastors left the city with a list of demands, including oversight of
police training and updating policies and training on use of force and de-escalation tech-
niques.

Elsewhere in Hampton Roads, a small group of Hampton protesters stood outside for
nearly 45 minutes near Joseph S. Darling Memorial Stadium, at the intersection at Ke-
coughtan Road and Victoria Boulevard.

Thegroupofabout20peoplewas organized by Darius J. Solomon, of Hampton. He then led
the protesters past the Hampton Police Headquarters to City Hall, where they chanted, “I
can’t breathe!” before

kneeling in silence in honor of George Floyd.

“Right here is where it matters,” Solomon said.

He wanted to bring the message to the people with power to make a change in the city.
The group was small, but Solomon feels like they were heard.

“It takes courage, it takes boldness and it takes a very special person to show that special
people aren’t just white, special people aren’t just black,” Gabe Diaz, a city worker, told the
demonstrators.

Diaz encouraged the group to participate in Mayor Donnie Tuck’s community discussions.
One of the discussions will be Tuesday at 7:00 p.m. The city will address methods of protest
and how effective they are by exploring local demonstrations, according to Facebook.
Thegroupalsograbbedtheattention of passersby who honked and

raised their fists, including people in a FedEx truck, a trucker, a landscaping truck, pickups
and cars.

Solomon sees this protest as just the beginning of his leadership in the movement.

He said he’s thinking of his children and their futures.

The group headed back to the stadium around 5:45 p.m., letting some protesters’ children
lead the way.

“T want to see a change. I want to make sure that when their lives are beginning as young
adults that they won’t be criticized just for being a black person,” Solomon said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200609/page/1/textview 2/2
