2020. 6. 18. BIGGEST PAYDAY LOAN FIRM IN VA. IS LEAVING

BIGGEST PAYDAY LOAN FIRM IN VA. IS LEAVING

Move comes as state crackdown looms

Daily Press - 1 Jun 2020 - 1: By Dave Ress Staff writer

Virginia’s largest payday lender is pulling out of the state ahead of stricter new regulations
that will take effect next year.

Advance America surrendered its payday and title loan licenses last week, said Joe Face,
commissioner of the Virginia Bureau of Financial Institutions.

So did Express Check Advance, which shares a South Carolina headquarters with Advance
America.

A payday loan is a short-term advance of up to $500, secured by a post-dated check for a
higher amount. That surcharge and the interest lenders have been allowed to charge has
amounted to the equivalent of an annual interest rate of as much as 818%, Bureau of Fi-
nancial Institutions data show. The rate averaged 251% in 2018, the latest year for which
data is available.

Title loans are secured by the borrower’s car or truck, which means that if the borrower
misses a payment, the lender can take the vehicle. These lenders had been allowed to
charge interest rates of up to 268%, bureau data show.

After January 1, interest for both types of loan will be capped at 36%. Payday lenders will be
able to charge a monthly fee of up to $25, and title lenders a monthly fee of up to $15.
“Under-served consumers deserve opportunities for regulated, responsible credit, and
rate caps like the new law’s 36% interest rate cap eliminate those options,” Jessica Rustin,
Advance America’s chief legal officer said in an emailed statement.

“Under such restrictions, lenders simply cannot accommodate both the higher loss rates
that come with serving the

needs of subprime consumers and basic operating expenses, such as paying our employees
and rent,” she added.

In 2018, payday lenders had to write off 5% of their loans as uncollectible. Capital One, the
Virginia-based credit card giant, also wrote off 5% of its loans that year, according to its
financial filings with federal banking regulators.

Rustin said Advance America’s Virginia customers offer what she described as overwhelm-
ing praise for the company’s loans, and worried that because many can’t qualify for credit
cards or bank loans, they will turn to online lenders that charge even higher rates.

Advance America operated 64 payday loan offices and 65 title loan stores, including eight
in Hampton Roads. Surrendering its license means more than 200 employees statewide
will lose their jobs, Rustin said.

Express Check Advance had 11 payday and 12 title loan offices, including two in Hampton
Roads.

“It’s simply not credible that payday lenders can’t operate under the new law,” said Jay
Speer, executive director of the Virginia Poverty Law Center. “Payday lenders, including

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200601/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. BIGGEST PAYDAY LOAN FIRM IN VA. IS LEAVING

Advance America, offer a $500, 6-month loan in Colorado for $125. The new law lets them
charge $204 for the same loan.”

Speer said credit will still be available, adding that new, lowercost lenders are planning to
open as soon as the law takes effect.

“When other states have made law changes ... lenders waited for the law to take effect be-
fore closing stores,” Speer said.

He said payday lenders have reported loan volume has dropped since the coronavirus hit.
“And payday lenders may be having a harder time collecting on loans because so many
people have become unemployed or had their hours cut,” he said. “Payday and title lenders

have relied on their ability to collect rather than borrowers’ ability to repay when making
loans.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200601/page/1/textview 2/2
