2020. 6. 18. South suburban retail sites remain shuttered

South suburban retail sites remain shuttered

Concern heightened over demonstrations, looting; Calumet City officials
join in River Oaks cleanup

Daily Southtown - 2 Jun 2020 - 1- By Mike Nolan

Major retail hubs in some south and southwest suburbs remained closed to shoppers Mon-
day amid heightened concerns about demonstrations or looting in the aftermath of the
death of George Floyd.

 

 

 

 

 

tary of State license facility in Chicago Heights, but it was not immediately clear whether
the fire was intentionally set as part of any unrest stemming from the death of Floyd while
being arrested by police in Minneapolis.

The building, 570 W. 209th St., is closed until further notice, according to the secretary of
state’s office. The fire started just after 9 p.m. on the south side of the building, according
to the office.

Reports of vandalism were sporadic Sunday in many south and southwest suburbs after
police, in response to social media chatter, were deployed in large numbers during the af-
ternoon and residents were urged to remain indoors.

Park Forest police said a building department vehicle that had windows damaged Sunday
night was likely related to unrest in the region. Police were not dispatched to any other
disturbances due to demonstrations, Chief Christopher Mannino said.

Orland Square mall closed early afternoon Sunday, but there were no incidents of vandal-
ism at the mall, according to Orland Park police Chief Tim McCarthy.

Mayor Keith Pekau said police made one arrest Sunday for disorderly conduct at the mall,
and two people were charged in connection with the attempted burglary of a jewelry store
nearby.

McCarthy said that police were responding to “a lot of false calls” from about 2 to 5 p.m.
Sunday from throughout the community.

“People would call in with reports of large groups of people driving through town,” he
said, but it was nothing more than normal traffic along busy streets such as LaGrange
Road or 159th Street.

In some cases it appears the calls were prompted because the vehicles carried African
Americans, McCarthy said.

The mall remained closed to customers Monday, with concrete barricades and police vehi-
cles blocking roads leading into the mall, northeast of LaGrange Road and 151st Street.
Homewood Mayor Rich Hofeld said all businesses were ordered to close Sunday with the

restriction limited on Monday to those along the busy Halsted corridor, where police vehi-
https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200602/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. South suburban retail sites remain shuttered

cles and barricades continued to block parking lot entrances Monday. No structures ap-
peared to be damaged.

Meanwhile, businesses in smaller shopping centers in Homewood were open and doing
brisk business, with parking lots nearly full in front of Ace Hardware and Walgreen’s in
Cherry Creek Shopping Center at Governors Highway and 183rd Street.

The Walmart in Olympia Fields remained closed Monday, with a row of shopping carts
blocking entry from Western Avenue into its parking lot. Country Club Hills’ Walmart on
167th Street east of Interstate 57 remained closed early Monday afternoon as a heavy po-
lice presence kept vehicles from entering the parking lot.

Orland Park was among a number of south and southwest suburbs that quickly imposed
curfews Sunday, and Orland Park’s curfew from 9 p.m. to 5 a.m. remains in effect through
Tuesday, the chief said.

Calumet City’s curfew of 8 p.m. until 6 a.m. remains in effect until further notice after
scores of looters smashed businesses’ windows and ransacked River Oaks mall on Sunday,
according to Mayor

Michelle Markiewicz Qualkinbush.

She and other city officials, including Clerk Nyota Figgs and Ald. Michael Navarrete, Mary-
beth Swibes and DeAndre Tillman, helped in cleanup efforts Monday at the mall.

On Monday, a man wearing a mask and armed with a rifle was perched atop the roof of the
Eagle Sports Range on 159th Street in Oak Forest, while a few other riflemen stood outside
the store at ground level watching cars stream into and out of the parking lot. On Sunday,
police had a large presence at the business, which houses a firing range as well as retail
sales of firearms.

The Southwest Suburban Activists held a Caravan for Injustice Sunday in Frankfort and
had earlier notified police about the cars that would be traveling on village streets, Mayor
Jim Holland said.

He said there were no disturbances or vandalism in the village, but rumors flew on social
media about unrest.

“T drove out to the library twice because I had heard, falsely, that it was on fire,” Holland
said. “I heard that even my own neighborhood was under attack.”

Over the weekend a window at St. Stephen Deacon and Martyr Church in Tinley Park was
damaged, but the vandalism was not believed to have been linked to any protests or
demonstrations, a church employee said Monday.

The damage to the window, which covers a stained glass window at the church, was dis-
covered early Sunday, he said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200602/page/1/textview 2/2
