2020. 6. 18. Trump demands New York call up the National Guard

Trump demands New York call up the National Guard

NYC extending curfew; president pushes harder line

Daily Southtown - 3 Jun 2020 - 1 - By Zeke Miller and Matt Sedensky

President Donald Trump on Tuesday turned up the pressure on governors to quell the vio-
lence set off by the death of George Floyd. The president amplified his calls of a day earlier,
in which he threatened to send in the military to restore order if governors didn’t.

 

   

WASHINGTON — President Donald Trump on Tuesday turned up the pressure on gover-
nors to quell the violence set off by the death of George Floyd, demanding New York call up
the National Guard to stop the “lowlifes and losers.”

As more demonstrations began taking shape around the country, the president amplified
his hard-line calls of a day earlier, in which he threatened to send in the military to restore
order if governors didn't do it.

“NYC, CALL UP THE NATIONAL GUARD,” he tweeted. “The lowlifes and losers are ripping
you apart. Act fast! Don't make the same horrible and deadly mistake you made with the
Nursing Homes!!!”

One day after a crackdown on peaceful protesters near the White House, thousands of
demonstrators massed a block away from the presidential mansion, facing law enforce-
ment personnel standing across a black chain-link fence. The fence had been put up
overnight to block access to Lafayette Park, just across the street from the White House.
In New York, where crowds of people on Monday night smashed store windows and police
made nearly 700 arrests, Mayor Bill de Blasio extended an 8 p.m. curfew all week.

“We're going to have a tough few days,” he warned, but added: “We're going to beat it
back.”

He pleaded with community leaders to step forward and “create peace.”

More than 20,000 National Guard members have been called up in 29 states to deal with
the violence. New York is not among them, and De Blasio has said he does not want the
Guard. On Tuesday, Democratic Gov. Andrew Cuomo called what happened in the city “a
disgrace.”

“The NYPD and the mayor did not do their job last night,” he said said at a briefing in Al-
bany.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200603/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 18. Trump demands New York call up the National Guard

He said the mayor underestimated the problem, and the nation's largest police force was
not deployed in sufficient numbers, though the city had said it doubled the usual police
presence.

In Atlanta, police fired tear gas at demonstrators. In Nashville, Tennessee, more than 60
National Guard members put down their riot shields at the request of peaceful protesters.
At a demonstration in Buffalo, New York, an SUV plowed into a group of officers, injuring
three.

An officer was shot and gravely wounded as police tried to disperse a crowd outside a Las
Vegas hotel and casino. Four officers were shot in St. Louis; they were expected to recover.
Philadelphia officials described a chaotic night in which one person was killed trying to use
explosives to open an ATM, a gun shop owner fatally shot a would-be thief, and a 19year-
old died of injuries during looting.

About a dozen other deaths have been reported around the country over the past week. And
more than 5,600 people nationwide have been arrested for offenses such as stealing,
blocking highways and breaking curfew, according to a count by The Associated Press.
Meanwhile, governors and mayors rejected Trump's threat to send in the military, with
some saying troops would be unnecessary and others questioning whether the government
has such authority and warning that such a step would be dangerous.

“Denver is not Little Rock in 1957, and Donald Trump is not President Eisenhower. This is
a time for healing, for bringing people together, and the best way to protect civil rights is
to move away from escalating violence,” Colorado Gov. Jared Polis and Denver Mayor
Michael Hancock, both Democrats, said in a statement, referring to Eisenhower's use of
troops to enforce school desegregation in the South.

A senior White House official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said that the president
is not rushing to send in the military and that his goal was to pressure governors to deploy
more National Guard members.

Such use of the military would mark a stunning federal intervention rarely seen in modern
American history.

Federal law allows presidents to dispatch the military into states to suppress an insurrec-
tion or if a state is defying federal law, legal experts said. But some state officials asserted
that the president does not have a unilateral right to send in troops against the will of local
governments.

Minnesota, meanwhile, opened a probe into whether the Minneapolis Police Department
has a pattern of discrimination against minorities. Floyd died May 25 after a white police
officer, Derek Chauvin, pressed his knee on the handcuffed black man's neck for several
minutes.

Gov. Tim Walz and the Minnesota Department of Human Rights announced the filing
Tuesday.

“We know that deeply seated issues exist,” Walz said. “I know it because we saw the casual
nature of the erasing of George Floyd's life and humanity.”

Amid the protests, cities struggled to keep police in line and avoid instances of excessive
force.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200603/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 18. Trump demands New York call up the National Guard

The police chief in Louisville, Kentucky, was fired after a restaurant owner was killed by
police and National Guard members enforcing a curfew. In Atlanta, six officers were
charged after a video showed authorities dragging two young people from a car during
protests.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200603/page/1/textview 3/3
