2020. 6. 18. ‘WE HAVE TO REMEMBER THE SACRIFICES’ OF VETS

‘WE HAVE TO REMEMBER THE SACRIFICES’ OF VETS
James City veteran, 91, aims to make Iwo Jima Memorial Park a reality

Daily Press - 25 May 2020 - 1 - By Kim O'Brien Root Correspondent

If you’ve ever driven south on Jamestown Road, you’ve probably seen it: a small tree-cov-
ered hill dotted with flags, white crosses and a large black metal outline of a group of ser-

  

b ‘ i " » i. i r and ri

This is Cliff Guertin’s hill. And he’s spent the past 20 years using it to remember combat
veterans.

Now, however, there’s a push to do more with the hill than one man’s simple show of pa-
triotism. For the past few years, Guertin and a handful of local business people have been
working to turn the spot into a park, complete with a 30foot-high replica of the Marine
Corps War Memorial in Washington. The actual memorial depicts the moment six Marines
raised a

USS. flag during the Battle of Iwo Jima.

The historic battle, one of the bloodiest during WWII, left 7,000 Marines dead and thou-
sands more wounded. The memorial, modeled after a famous photograph taken of the sec-
ond flag raised on Mount Suribachi, is often seen as symbolic of the resilience of those who
fought. It’s dedicated to all the Marines who have lost their lives in war.

This past February marked 75 years since the Battle of Iwo Jima, a tiny island south of Ja-
pan.

For Guertin, having a likeness of the monument on his hill is part of a dream to turn the
spit of land into Williamsburg and James City County’s very own Iwo Jima Memorial Park.
Rather than just re

membering Marines, however, the local memorial would be dedicated to all combat veter-
ans. Guertin sees the flag-raising as an image for what all war veterans have gone through.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200525/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 18. ‘WE HAVE TO REMEMBER THE SACRIFICES’ OF VETS

“This is for the combat veterans,” he said recently, showing off his hill one drizzly morn-
ing. “For the veterans and their families. We have to remember the sacrifices they all
make.”

Guertin, 91, a long-time James City County resident originally from Oxford, Mas-
sachusetts, is a veteran from a long line of veterans. He and his seven brothers all served in
the military. His father was in World War I, his brother was in World War II and Guertin
himself fought in the Korean War. Guertin spent more than 20 years in the

Army and working for the government.

He acquired the property at Jamestown and Neck-O-Land Road about 20 years ago and
eventually began sprucing it up. Just about every day, he climbs on his John Deere tractor
and motors over from his nearby home, then dons a pair of well-worn work gloves and
spends a few hours clearing brush, pulling weeds from around the existing memorial and
planting flowers. Over the years, as his memorial has grown, the widower — his wife,
Nancy, died five years ago — has gotten a lot of help from volunteers in maintaining the
land, keeping the hill tidy and the grass growing.

There are 3.7 acres that extend back from the small hill, which Guertin envisions as a park
with walking trails dedicated to each branch of the armed forces. Earlier this year, a board
of directors formed and the group established the park as a 501(c)(3) so it could begin
fundraising.

Guertin deeded an easement to James City County last year, which preserves the land for
open natural space and restricts development. Plans have been drawn up for the memorial
and park, as well as permits secured, said Glenn Helseth, the board’s treasurer. Helseth
and his wife, Debbie, own the Carrot Tree, a Williamsburg bakery and restaurant, and both
sit on the board along with other local business owners. Now, Helseth said, it’s time to
start putting the plans into action.

The proposed park includes a passive linear trail system that will connect with the Capital
Trail’s nearby bike paths. A replica of the Iwo Jima monument — surrounded by a sidewalk
— would sit at the crest of the hill, overlooking Jamestown Road. Guertin envisions one
day having an eternal flame burning at the spot. He sees the park as a place where genera-
tions can learn about the branches of the military, and give children a place to play.

“It’s his desire to have a lasting monument there, which I think is very noble,” said Scott
Stevens, James City Country’s administrator. “Things like this often start with a group
that’s trying to get there, and I applaud him for that.”

The project will require about $1.5 million total, for the project and maintenance. Organiz-
ers are seeking funds, as well as donations of materials and labor. An electrician, for exam-
ple, is needed to help light the memorial.

“I know it’s a difficult time for fundraising, but we still want to garner public attention and
let people know this is a real thing,” Helseth said. “This is going to be a very well-used and
loved piece of property. It’s Cliff’s last lifelong dream, and we’re going to make it happen.”
Guertin, however, is quick to turn away any attention from himself. If you get him talking
up on his hill, he might mention Korea: “It was bad over there, and the rain would come,”
he recalled in his faint New England accent recently, dressed in an oversized camouflage
shirt while staring out over his memorial. “You’d be ankle-deep in the mud.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200525/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 18. ‘WE HAVE TO REMEMBER THE SACRIFICES’ OF VETS

Then he changed the subject. “But I don’t want to talk about me. I want to talk about the
combat veterans. Because they can’t talk. They deserve no less.”

For more information or to find out how you can help, visit iwojimawilliamsburg.com or

email info@iwojimawilliamsburg.com. Donations can be made at gofundme.com/f/iwo-
jima-memorial-williamsburg.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200525/page/1/textview 3/3
