2020. 6. 18. Tinley Park afternoon protest peaceful

Tinley Park afternoon protest peaceful
Police keep group contained to small section of Oak Park

Daily Southtown « 3 Jun 2020 - 1 - BY MIKE NOLAN mnolan@tribpub.com

More than 70 marchers confined to a one-block length of a street in downtown Tinley Park
demanded justice Tuesday afternoon in the aftermath of the death of George Floyd. A
heavy police presence kept the group to a small section of Oak Park Avenue just west of the
Metra train station.

i 7 L

   

Shouting “Say his name, George Floyd,” and “I can’t breathe,” the marchers were at times
heckled by a cluster of bystanders.

Mostly young and mostly white, the marchers carried signs reading “white silence is com-
pliance” and “Black Lives Matter.”

Tinley Park police, who had blocked traffic in the area, were supplemented by a handful of
Cook County sheriff ’s police.

After walking up and down the street for about 30 minutes the group sat in Zabrocki Plaza
directly west of the station.

While there were a few heated verbal exchanges lobbed back and forth, even between a
couple of onlookers, the event was otherwise peaceful. Demonstrations have occurred
around the country since Floyd’s death May 25 while being arrested by Minneapolis police.
Many of the Tinley officers wore helmets with face shields and some carried long wood ba-
tons. They formed two lines, with one keeping an eye on the sitting demonstrators and the
other facing the group gathered on the west side of Oak Park Avenue. Several other on-
lookers snapped photos or shot video with their phones.

Similar demonstrations have become common in recent days but at times there has been
looting and property damage. A spate of social media chatter Sunday regarding possible
demonstrations sent police scrambling in suburbs including Frankfort, Oak Forest, Orland
Park and elsewhere, with large shopping centers cordoned off and curfews quickly im-
posed.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200603/page/1/textview 4/1
