2020. 6. 18. TEACHING IN A PANDEMIC

TEACHING IN A PANDEMIC
Top teachers from Newport News, Hampton talk about how they work now

Daily Press - 28 May 2020 - 1 - By Matt Jones Staff writer

Wilson was at Chili’s with his brother when he got the call saying he wouldn’t be back in
the classroom this school year.

&

“T was like, ‘Wow, alright. So I guess this is real,’” Wilson said. “Immediately I just started
thinking about the students and being able to access them and get them information.”
Teachers were already doing some distance learning at that point, after Gov. Ralph
Northam ordered schools closed March 13. But the news was still a shock.

“Honestly, on the outside I was calm,” said Ashley Chassard. “On the inside, I was pan-
icked.”

Wilson, a social studies teacher at Bethel High School in Hampton, and Chassard, a science
teacher at Menchville High School in Newport News, are their divisions’ respective teach-
ers of the year for 2020.

They have a lot in common. They’ reboththechildrenofteachers. They both taught at the
high schools they graduated from. And now, they’re both navigating a landscape they
couldn’t have preErik dicted.

“Tt was like building the plane and flying it at the same time,” Chassard said. “This is re-
ally where you see that teaching is a team sport.” Chassard didn’t always plan on teaching.
After majoring in biology at the University of Mary Washington, she was a women’s soccer
coach at Muhlenberg College in Pennsylvania.

But after she volunteered in a middle school classroom, she went through a career switch
program to become a biology teacher, following in the footsteps of her mother who taught
in Newport News for decades. She taught at Warwick High School

before coming to Menchville, from which she graduated in 1989.

Chassard now teaches Advanced Placement Biology, genetics, forensic science and honors
molecular cell and research — a class where students are pursuing a multi-year research
project studying neuron degradation .

“Being confused is a good place for a scientist to be, because it makes them have to keep
trying to figure out what the answers can be,” Chassard said.

Wilson decided on a career path while studying at Howard University and pursuing a mas-
ter’s degree at Ohio State University. His visit to Columbus for his admissions interview
was his first time flying.

He has been teaching at Bethel for two years and at Hampton High School for 12 years be-
fore that. His mother, a Hampton City Schools employee for 31 years, was also a teacher
there, including when he was a student in Hampton’s class of 1994.

He teaches sophomores AP World History and World History 2. “I’ve always enjoyed relay-
ing information and knowledge to people,” Wilson said. “I’ve always had that inner teach-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200528/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 18. TEACHING IN A PANDEMIC

ing sense.”

The closure of schools has affected almost every aspect of their day, but they still get up
early in the morning. Although he doesn’t have to drive to school, Wilson says waking up
at 5 a.m. helps him keep a sense of normalcy.

His classes meet virtually on Monday through Thursday between 10:45 a.m. and 1:45 p.m.,
which is most of the time when he’s interacting with students and grading work. The first
few minutes of every class is mostly spent talking with students about everything that’s
going on, including whether they’! be back in the classroom in fall.

“Even though my work schedule is not the same, I just welcome those opportunities to
meet with my students, talk with them, to see how they’ re doing,” Wilson said.

Chassard gets up early in part to keep her routine, but also in part to help juggle time with
her two sons who are in middle school. She checks her email and catch up on things stu-
dents turned in overnight in the early morning hours — many of her students seem to be
nocturnal.

At home, they have one Chromebook for her sons to share. But sometimes both of her kids
need to be online for classes, which means she has to give up her work laptop. “I can only
imagine what it’s like having three or four children and what’s going on in their home,”
Chassard said.

Switching to virtual instruction wasn’t easy, especially since her classes were so hands-on.
Her forensics class had been about to start their big crime scene analysis project.

Instead, she’s joined online groups of teachers to come up with ideas on how to engage
students and help students learn at their own pace. In her forensics class, for example,
students completing a unit about psychological profiling made Spotify playlists for differ-
ent serial killers, profiling them through songs.

“T didn’t use Google Classroom that often because I’m such a hands-on person in the
classroom. I’d rather be doing a lab,” Chassard said. “I had to make some shifts, and it was
a steep learning curve.”

Wilson’s transition was helped in part by another teacher during his last year at Hampton
High School. He was mentoring a new teacher, who had gone through a career-switcher
program. She was much more tech-savvy and wound up mentoring him, showing Wilson
how to use Google Classroom and other online services to make teaching and grading more
efficient.

“That transition to the virtual world wasn’t too big of a deal,” Wilson said. “I guess the
only thing I do really miss is the daily interaction with the students.”

The pandemic has also meant that teachers like Wilson and Chassard are doing more than
just teaching online. They’ve also become sort of case managers, tracking down students
that haven’t gotten online and finding out how they can help. Wilson said that initially,
he’d only have four to six students out of a 25student class log in for Zoom sessions.
Although all middle- and high-school students in Hampton have Google Chromebooks,
some students don’t have internet at home. Wilson has spent hours reaching out to those
families and printing off materials for those families to pick up or to mail to them.

“It’s something we take for granted — we just kind of assume that everyone has internet
now. No, everybody doesn’t,” Wilson said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200528/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 18. TEACHING IN A PANDEMIC

“Just like everybody doesn’t have food in their house. Just like everybody doesn’t have ca-
ble television in their house.”

More students have logged in to Chassard’s classes as time has passed and parents have
learned more about the kinds of work that their students are expected to do. In her two AP
classes, shehasa100%participation rate — every student has logged on and is engaging
with the material.

But in her forensics class, there was still 5-10% of the class not fully engaged, meaning
Chassard is still calling home, calling alternate phone numbers, trying to figure out what
resources they need to get back in the classroom.

“T’m working harder now than I’ve ever worked teaching in my life,” Chassard said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200528/page/1/textview 3/3
