2020. 6. 18. GOVERNMENT JOB LOSSES ESCALATING

GOVERNMENT JOB LOSSES ESCALATING

Number of workers at its lowest since 2001, and most of the cuts are at the
local level

Daily Press - 8 Jun 2020 - 1 - By Geoff Mulvihill Associated Press

Jobs with state and city governments are usually a source of stability in the U.S. economy,
but the financial devastation wrought by the coronavirus pandemic has forced cuts that
will reduce public services — from schools to trash pickup.

Even as the U.S. added jobs in

May, the number of people employed by federal, state and local governments dropped by
585,000. The overall job losses among public workers have reached more than 1.5 million
since March, according to seasonally adjusted federal jobs data released Friday.

The number of government employees is now the lowest it’s been since 2001, and most of
the cuts are at the local level.

“With that comes a decline in essential public services,” Lee Saunders, president of the
American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, said on a conference call
with reporters last week. For instance, “911 calls are taking a long time to be answered.”
Clean drinking water and trash pickups also are being affected in some places, he said.

Tax revenue from businesses walloped by coronavirus restrictions has plummeted, forcing
cuts by cities and states that rely on that money. It’s likely to get worse in the coming
months unless Congress delivers additional aid to states and cities.

Several states are projecting tax revenue will be down 20% or more for the fiscal year
starting next month, and governments are facing rising costs resulting from the virus and
the police and National Guard response to protests over racial injustice and police brutal-
ity.

The layoffs and furloughs are coming amid calls for governments and school districts to do
more to respond to the outbreak — from hiring workers to find those who had contact with
people infected with the coronavirus to additional janitors needed to sanitize schools and
make them safe for students and teachers to return.

“It’s going to make it very, very difficult to reopen schools in the fall because you need
more money, not less money to reopen,” said Randi Weingarten, president of the Ameri-
can Federation of

Teachers.

In the Chicago suburbs, Lyons School District No. 103 laid off health aides at its six schools.
One of them, Maureen Jacobsen, said she was told the workers — who give students
medicine and first aid for minor injuries — were being laid off in anticipation of a new re-
quirement that each school has a nurse. A district official did not return a call Friday.
Jacobsen, 58, is working on her resume for the first time in 21 years. She said the students
at Robinson Elementary will be affected by not having her there to help them when school
resumes in the fall.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200608/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. GOVERNMENT JOB LOSSES ESCALATING

“When they go back, they’re looking for the familiar,” Jacobsen said. “I could tell you that
I had 280 kids in my building, and I knew their names.”

She may be on the leading edge of permanent layoffs for government employees.

Federal numbers do not provide precise breakdowns, but many of those out of government
jobs so far have been temporarily furloughed. And some of the first to go were those whose
absence would not be felt deeply when stay-at-home orders were in effect.

For instance, the Pittsburgh

Parking Authority furloughed its three dozen enforcement officers and meter technicians.
In Michigan, nearly two-thirds of state government workers have been furloughed
through July. And in North Carolina, more than 9,000 state Department of Transportation
employees have been told to take unpaid time off by June 26.

But union officials warn that cuts could become deeper and permanent as budgets are
ironed out. New Jersey Gov. Phil Murphy said his state could lose 200,000 government
jobs.

Lily Eskelsen Garcia, president of the National Education Association, said the impact will
be biggest in lower-income areas.

“A 30% cut in a poor school district’s budget means you just lost your arts program, you
just lost your sports program,” she said. “We are going to have to lay off one teacher in
each grade.”

And the first workers to be cut also could be the most vulnerable.

“Very often the first people who will go will be all the administrative staff, the public
works department and custodial staff and many people who are low paid, who are women,
who are black and brown,” said Hetty Rosenstein, New Jersey director of Communications
Workers of America.

Unions and bipartisan groups are pushing Congress to send state and local governments
more help quickly. Following a $2.2 trillion coronavirus aid package in March, the Demo-
craticled House last month approved an additional $3 trillion bill, which includes $1 tril-
lion for governments. But Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., has said his
chamber will not agree to such as large amount — or anything quickly — as the economy
reopens.

For Ashley Sims, a library assistant in Louisville, Kentucky, being furloughed when li-
braries were closed did not cause a financial strain. With a $600 weekly boost in unem-
ployment benefits as part of a federal response to the crisis, she said her pay has been
higher than when she was working.

But there are worries about permanent layoffs. Sims, who’s president of the library work-
ers union, said she may consider a voluntary layoff to save the jobs of some of her co-
workers.

She said many who rely most on libraries are lower-income people and immigrants who
can’t afford computers and use them to search for work.

“It would be an incredible loss,” Sims said. “Libraries are the lifeblood of communities.”
Union officials warn that cuts could become deeper and permanent as budgets are ironed
out.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200608/page/1/textview 2/2
