2020. 6. 18. NEWPORT NEWS SHROUDS MONUMENT

NEWPORT NEWS SHROUDS MONUMENT
Mayor says covering is for public safety as officials weigh options

Daily Press - 12 Jun 2020 - 1°: By Josh Reyes Staff writer

NEWPORT NEWS — Since 1909, a statue of a Confederate soldier has stood in front of the
Warwick County Courthouse in what’s now the Denbigh area of Newport News.

 

The monument for the local war veterans Company H, 32nd Virginia Infantry unit stands
in a park on a somewhat sleepy street, away from the eyes of anyone besides the people
who live nearby and visitors to the handful of businesses and the city’s Denbigh municipal
complex.

Unlike many similar monuments, it was free of graffiti or other damage Thursday. But by
the afternoon, you couldn’t see the monu

ment anymore. City crews wrapped it in several tarps, tying them tightly to the soldier at
the top and the base that reads “to our gallant soldiers of the Confederacy.”

Some community activists and members of the City Council say it’s time for the monu-
ment to come down.

In a statement, Mayor McKinley Price said the city covered the monument “in light of re-
cent demonstrations that resulted in injuries and in an effort to protect the safety of the
public as well as avoid destruction of the monument.”

Demonstrators across the country have protested racism and police brutality in the weeks
following the killing of George Floyd, who died after a Minneapolis police officer kneeled
on his neck for nearly nine minutes. Many have turned their attention to monuments hon-
oring Confederate soldiers and leaders, saying they perpetuate white supremacy and cele-
brate people who were enemies of the United States.

Leaders in Norfolk and Richmond have called for Confederate monuments to come down.
In Portsmouth Wednesday night, the City Council put off moving its monument, leading
demonstrators to attempt to tear it down on their own, beheading the figures and covering
them in paint. One man was hurt when a statue hit him as it fell.

Varying opinions on council

Newport News City Councilman Dave Jenkins said at Tuesday’s council meeting that he
would like the city to remove the monument, saying it does not represent the city’s values
and celebrated a time when Americans were divided.

He pointed out that Newport News was making strides in equality and opportunities for
people of color in the years before the monument was dedicated, and felt it was a step back.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200612/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 18. NEWPORT NEWS SHROUDS MONUMENT

Jenkins said as well that the community should be able to provide input about the monu-
ment.

City Manager Cindy Rohlf said she would gather information on the monument for the
council, which did not make a formal decision.

Price said in a statement that, “We are petitioning the Department of Historic Resources to
consider the (city’s) request for the possible removal or relocation of the monument.” The
city owns the monument, but it is under an easement that requires the city to get permis-
sion from the State Board of Historic Resources before making any changes on the site.
Price said he wants the monument to be removed from the site. He said the monument is
nondescript and not honoring specific people beyond a group that fought against the
United States.

Councilwoman Sharon Scott asked Tuesday for information about how to bring it down.
She’s previously said the monument “represents bigotry and hatred” and suggested mov-
ing it to the Virginia War Museum. Councilman Marcellus Harris posted on Facebook that
he supported Jenkins’ desire to see the statue moved from its current location.
Councilwoman Pat Woodbury said she was against removing the monument. She said the
statue was erected to memorialize the people of Warwick County who died in the Civil War,
not the issues over which they fought. “It’s part of the history of Warwick County,” she
said. Woodbury said she supported adding other statues or informative resources to the
site.

Vice Mayor Tina Vick said she wanted civil public input before making a decision about the
monument. She said discussing monuments makes her afraid because emotions get hot,
and people can get hurt. She recalled protests in Charlottesville in 2017 surrounding its
monuments and the ensuing protests that included a white supremacist ramming his car
into a crowd and killing Heather Heyer, who was demonstrating in favor of removing a
statue of Robert E. Lee.

Councilwoman Saundra Cherry could not be reached for comment.

The council discussed the monument in 2017 after the white supremacist rally in Char-
lottesville. Andrew Shannon of the Newport News chapter of the Southern Christian Lead-
ership Conference advocated for removing the monument and installing statues of Freder-
ick Douglass and Virginia civil rights leaders Curtis W. Harris and Marcellus L. Harris Jr.
Shannon repeated that after Norfolk and Richmond made announcements in favor of re-
moving their monuments. “Now is the time to bring people together and not divide them
apart by using symbols that glorify the enslavement of African Americans. Blatant symbols
of divisiveness,” Shannon wrote in a letter to the City Council.

Quietly covered

Newport News did not announce it was planning to cover the monument on Thursday.
Around midday, crews lifted tarps over the statue, wrapping it tightly, and then covered
the base and commemorative plaque on the ground.

Members of the Warwick County Historical Society, which operates out of the two former
courthouse buildings next to the monument, took photos and video of the work.

“By default, the Warwick County Historical Society is connected to the monument at this
sleepy site,” the society wrote in an email. “We document the individuals and families of

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200612/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 18. NEWPORT NEWS SHROUDS MONUMENT

old Warwick County and early Newport News as a natural part of our mission. Simply by
this, our studies weave in and out of the legs of that terrible conflict that these men and
women became so willingly or unwillingly entrenched in. It caused tragedy and deep
wounds all around that are obviously still unhealed.”

The society stated it is interested in authentic stories of the area from many perspectives
and facing and learning from history. “Keep the statues where they are so that people can
explain history to their kids. Keep them so that we can have constructive dialogue and gain
a deeper understanding and healing,” the society stated.

The crews drew some attention from drivers, who slowed their vehicles to gander at the
statue being covered. A few people stopped at the site, with a couple expressing anger at
what they saw. Others pulled into the parking area to take pictures, and some police offi-
cers from the nearby station checked to see the monument once it was covered.

Robin Woolfolk-Benton owns the Red-Headed Step-Child Salon next door and wandered
over after a client told her what was happening. Woolfolk- Benton, who is black, said she
walks her puppy through that park every day and never thinks much about the monument
itself.

She said it would be a strong statement to remove the monument, but more needed to be
done. “The monument is a symbol, but hate it in the heart. You remove the symbol, but the
hate is still there,” she said

Woolfolk-Benton said the protests and racial equality have been all they’ve talked about in
her salon the last couple weeks, and she said that type of discussion was essential to find-
ing the roots of hate and injustice and making change.

She noted that while she sat and watched, no one else in the vicinity acknowledged her. She
didn’t expect anyone to have a long conversation with her, but she felt overlooked —
something she said is not uncommon for her.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/202006 12/page/1/textview 3/3
