2020. 6. 18. ‘A MOTHER’S MARCH’

‘A MOTHER’S MARCH’

Moms in Hampton Roads gather to talk about their children, the police and
how their community interacts with them

Daily Press - 10 Jun 2020 - 1 - By Saleen Martin and Josh Reyes Staff writers

irthday.
\

   
  

Tuesday would’ve been India Kager’s 32nd b
ei & :

 

News about the death of her daughter at the hands of Virginia Beach police.

Best was one of several mothers invited to Tuesday night’s “A Mother’s March” to talk
about their children, police and how the public interacts with them.

An event organizer said she heard from women who wanted a platform and felt other ral-
lies and marches weren’t promoting their voices.

At least 100 people attended in all, but Best missed it.

Best’s daughter, Kager, a Navy veteran and U.S. Postal Service worker, was with Angelo
Delano Perry and her infant son on Sept. 5, 2015, when their paths crossed with Virginia
Beach

Police. Officers moved in shortly before midnight to take Perry into custody at a 7-Eleven
in the Princess Anne area of the city.

Police said Perry shot at police, and they fired back. Both Perry and Kager were killed.
Officials said at the time the child, who was in his car seat in the back, was not injured in
the shooting, but Black Lives Matter 757 organizer Japharii Jones said on Tuesday the boy
has some hearing problems stemming from the

incident.

The shooting led Kager’s family to file a wrongful death lawsuit in 2017 against several
Virginia Beach police involved in the shooting. They said the police used excessive force
and that officers should’ve tried to get Kager and her son out of the car first.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/202006 10/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. ‘A MOTHER’S MARCH’

In August 2018, a jury found that two members of the SWAT team who shot Kager — S.
Ferreira and K. Ziemer — acted with gross negligence. The jury recommended $800,000 in
compensation to Kager’s estate. The city did not appeal, agreeing instead to pay the full
amount.

Several of the mothers who spoke Tuesday stressed the importance of voting.

Vickie Williams-Cullins said community members don’t know howmuchpowerthey-
have.There’s power in votes, information and the ability to hold officials accountable.
Latonya Wallace noted that officers who commit brutality are part of a bureaucracy. City
and county officials are elected by the people, and can be replaced.

In Virginia Beach, the mother of a former ODU student who was sentenced to 10 years in
prison spoke at a news conference Tuesday evening outside the Virginia Beach Police
Department’s fourth precinct.

Lavern Rushin said her son, Matthew, was mistreated by the courts.

“He was railroaded by the system because of the color of his skin, number one, and num-
ber two because he’s autistic,” she said.

Matthew Rushin pleaded guilty last year to two counts of malicious wounding and felony
hit and run. The charges stemmed from a Jan. 4, 2019, car crash that put 72-year-old
George Cusick in a coma for nearly two months. When Rushin was sentenced by Virginia
Beach Circuit Judge Stephen Mahan, witnesses said Cusick was unable to talk or feed him-
self and no longer recognized his family.

Lavern Rushin said her son suffered a traumatic brain injury and a collapsed lung after an-
other car accident two years prior.

“Those police officers knew that Matthew was autistic,” she said. “They knew that they
could twist and manipulate his words, which they did.”

It wasn’t just mothers who spoke out during Tuesday’s events. At the march in Newport
News, Commonwealth Attorney Howard Gwynn emphasized the need to investinjobspro-
grams,after-school programs, school resources, counselors and mental health care access.
He challenged the crowd to engage with local government. Go to school board and city
council meetings, he said.

HesaidGod ,notthegovernment, gives us the unalienable rights of life, liberty and the pur-
suit of happiness. The people have to demand the government doesn’t infringe on that, he
said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/202006 10/page/1/textview 2/2
