2020. 6. 18. ‘It might save your life’

‘It might save your life’

Robbins police officer returns to work, urges testing after almost dying
from COVID-19

Daily Southtown - 29 May 2020 - 1 - Ted Slowik

Village officials and first responders welcomed Robbins police officer Edward Schmit back
to work Thursday after the veteran patrolman nearly died from the COVID-19 respiratory
disease.

 

 

Schmit said he spent nearly two weeks at Palos Community Hospital in Palos Heights. He
was unconscious for a week while a ventilator kept him alive by pumping air into his lungs.
“The doctor said I had a less than 20% chance of survival,” Schmit told reporters Thursday
morning outside the Robbins Police Department.

Schmit shared details of his ordeal before beginning his first shift back at work since April
2. Mayor Tyrone Ward said he and many others prayed for Schmit to recover.

“We are grateful, honored and blessed to have officer Schmit back to work,” Ward said.
“Our community rallied together to pray for his recovery. God certainly has answered our
prayers.”

Schmit, 48, of Crestwood, said he first sought treatment March 12 after experiencing
shortness of breath and a fever. Initially, he said, a doctor told him he had bronchitis.
Later, a second visit to a doctor produced a diagnosis of pneumonia, he said.

He suspected he had the disease that has so far killed more than 100,000 people in the
United States and at least 363,000 people worldwide, so he had himself tested for coron-
avirus, he said. When the results came back positive, he went to the hospital, he said.

He was placed in a medically induced coma, he said.

“T was on a ventilator for seven days,” Schmit told reporters.

Schmit said his parents, fiancée, Brenda Restaino, and two adult children from a previous
marriage were not allowed to visit him in the

“We are grateful, honored and blessed to have officer Schmit back to work.”

— Robbins Mayor Tyrone Ward

hospital.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200529/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. ‘It might save your life’

Doctors told them to prepare for the worst, he said.

“They told my father and Brenda not to hope so much for me to come out of this,” he said.
Schmit said he left the hospital April 13. He continued his recovery at home, he said, where
he felt weak. He lost 24 pounds during his illness, he said.

“T got very tired,” he said. “I had nightmares (and) cold sweats. I was constantly checking
the oxygen level of my blood while I was at home.”

Ward and police Chief Roy Wells said Schmit only began working for the Robbins Police
Department in September, but that the veteran patrolman made an immediate impact in
the community. Robbins has about 5,400 residents.

“From a dismal 20% survival rate to now walking into the police station at 100% says
much about the courageous spirit of Edward,” Wells said. “I’m excited to welcome him
back to work.”

Schmit said he was as Crestwood police officer for many years.

“T enjoy working in this community,” he said.

While in the hospital, Schmit said he was treated with hydroxychloroquine, a drug used to
treat malaria and other illnesses. He said he believed it helped him. President Donald
Trump has said he was treated with the drug. Anthony Fauci, the nation’s top infectious
disease expert, has said it is not an effective treatment for COVID-19.

People should take the disease seriously, Schmit said. As Illinois on Friday allows restau-
rants and other businesses to reopen at reduced capacities, health experts advise people to
wear masks in public and to wash their hands often.

“If you have any symptoms, go get tested, or even if you think you might have it, get
tested,” Ward said. “It might save your life or somebody else’s.”

Schmit said people should take care and protect themselves.

“You should take precautions,” he said.

Schmit said the near-death experience has made him more appreciative of loved ones and
work colleagues in Robbins.

“It’s changed my perspective on life,” he said. “I’m just happy to be alive. Every day is a
new day.”

He said that although he was the one who was sick, he felt bad for his loved ones and co-
workers who thought they might lose him.

“Tt was harder on my family — my kids, parents and fellow officers — than it was on me,”
Schmit said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200529/page/1/textview 2/2
