2020. 6. 18. Lockport grad Molton transfers to Fresno State

Lockport grad Molton transfers to Fresno State

After Old Dominion cancels program, Lockport grad transfers to Fresno
State

Daily Southtown - 4 Jun 2020 - 1- By Steve Millar

After going through the recruiting process, choosing Old Dominion and spending one sea-
son wrestling with the Monarchs, Anthony Molton, far right, found himself having to pick
a school all over again.

 

 

 

After going through the recruiting process, choosing Old Dominion and spending one sea-
son wrestling with the Monarchs, Lockport graduate Anthony Molton found himself hav-
ing to pick a school all over again.

On April 12, Old Dominion announced the elimination of its wrestling program due to
budget concerns.

Molton — who won the Class 3A state championship at 120 pounds for the 2017-18 season
— and his teammates were informed of the university’s decision on a Zoom call.

“We were all pretty distraught by it,” Molton said. “It kind of us hit us straight in the face.
It was bad.

“It was a total shock. I guess the school had been thinking about it for months, but we
didn’t know. Our coaches didn’t even know until that day.”

Old Dominion had competed in wrestling since 1957.

“No one wants to reduce opportunities for young men to compete and represent Old Do-
minion, but we are required to be responsible with departmental resources,” athletic di-
rector Wood Selig said in a press release. “Our decision became even more clear during this
coronavirus crisis, which we know will have significant impact on future athletic budgets.
“This decision will better allow the remaining sports to compete at a national level.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200604/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. Lockport grad Molton transfers to Fresno State

It was tough for Molton to say goodbye to his teammates after just one season, especially
not being able to communicate in person as most have returned home with campus closed
due to the coronavirus pandemic.

“‘We became another family and it got ripped apart in an instant,” Molton said. “We’re all
spreading out now, going to different schools all over the country.

““We’re going to keep in touch, but it’s still like, ‘Wow, we’re not teammates anymore.’”
Molton has found his new home, however. He signed in late April with Fresno State.

“T took about a week to kind of sit there and think, put my focus on school and finishing
the semester, and then other coaches started reaching out to me,” he said. “That’s when I
started thinking about transferring and what’s next.”

Molton felt Fresno State presented the best option for him for several reasons.

“T think it’s going to be a great fit for me,” he said. “The plan is for me to start at 125 right
off the bat, be the dual starter and the guy to get everything going and set the atmosphere.
1 like that.

“They have great academics, they have a hospital nearby and I want to go into medicine, so
that’s a great fit. They’re in a bigger conference (the Big 12) than ODU, so I’m excited for
the competition.”

Molton redshirted for his only season at Old Dominion, but he did wrestle in open tourna-
ments and finished with a 16-12 record.

“College is definitely different from high school,” he said. “There’s way better competi-
tion all the time. Everyone is talented and experienced, so it pretty much comes down to
whoever works harder and whoever has that grit to win.

“TI definitely learned a lot about the discipline it takes to have success in college.”

Molton is looking forward to meeting his new teammates.

“T have to go bond with a new team now,” he said. “But I’m a pretty open person so I usu-
ally have a pretty easy time doing that.”

Molton said the pain he felt when Old Dominion decided to terminate the program will
help put into perspective any tough days he might have at Fresno State.

“T don’t think there’s going to be a time when I feel like things are too bad,” he said. “I
won’t be able to complain about anything after going through all this.”

Steve Millar is a freelance reporter for the Daily Southtown.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200604/page/1/textview 2/2
