2020. 6. 18. Accolades pour in after death of Will executive

Accolades pour in after death of Will executive

County head Larry Walsh remembered as thoughtful leader, dedicated pub-
lic servant

Daily Southtown - 5 Jun 2020 - 1 - By Alicia Fabbre

Will County residents Thursday remembered County Executive Larry Walsh as a thoughtful
man who enjoyed his life of public service, and a former president of the United States of-

 

  

Walsh, 72, died Wednesday at his home following a years-long battle against prostate can-
cer.

The Elwood farmer began his political career at the age of 21 when he joined the Elwood
school board in 1970. In 1973, he was elected as Jackson Township supervisor, a position he
held until December 2004. Walsh served on the Will County Board in 1974 and again in
1992, and in the llinois Senate from April 1997 until January 2005, when he took office as
Will County executive.

Walsh often shared stories of being Barack Obama’s seatmate in the Illinois Senate and
about poker games with Obama. Later, he would share stories of visiting Obama in Wash-
ington. The former president issued a statement Thursday remembering Walsh.

“Larry and I entered the state senate together and became fast friends,” Obama said. “I'll
always be grateful for his camaraderie and support, but even more grateful that he was
such a good public servant for the people of Illinois.”

His son, state Rep. Larry Walsh Jr., of the 86th District, recalled learning about public ser-
vice from his father.

“When I got appointed as state representative, he sat me down and said ‘Listen here, when
you go down there, your word is your bond,’” Walsh Jr., said. “I still hold those words true.
I watched how he did it and I try to do my best with that in mind.”

Walsh Jr. extended the family’s gratitude for the outpouring of support from the commu-
nity.

“T had a helluva trend setter in Springfield and from the accolades and well wishes I’ve
been receiving over the past 12 hours it shows the impact he had,” Walsh Jr. said, noting
his father was one to put politicking behind when campaign season was over and focused
on working to find bipartisan solutions on measures to benefit his constituents.

“He’s going to be a missed icon within Will County and the state of Illinois,” he said.
Walsh battled prostate cancer in 2014 and announced in August that his cancer had re-
turned and that he would not seek a fifth term. The Elwood Democrat had been absent

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200605/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 18. Accolades pour in after death of Will executive

from county board meetings since late last year as his health deteriorated and entered
hospice care at home in recent weeks, according to his chief of staff, Nick Palmer.

“T’ve been a very blessed man and a very lucky man,” Walsh said when he announced his
retirement plans to the Will County Board in August 2019.

Gov. J.B. Pritzker said Walsh’s death was a loss for the county and the state.

“From the school board to the state senate to the county, Larry Walsh dedicated his life to
bettering his community,” Pritzker said in Facebook and Twitter posts Thursday. “I was
lucky to call Larry a friend and offer my sincere condolences as we mourn a great loss not
just for Will County, but our entire state.”

Illinois Senate President Don Harmon from Oak Park said Walsh was a tireless advocate for
his

constituents and community.

“Whenever I think of Will County, I will forever think of Larry Walsh,” Harmon said.
“Those who knew and worked with him are better for it. He never failed to make me smile
or laugh or feel better about the world.”

Walsh was widely known for his down-toearth style and love for people.

Jim Moustis, a Frankfort Republican, was elected to the county board with Walsh in 1992.
“He really had a great sense of humor,” said Moustis.

He recalled one meeting when he and Walsh were sitting next to each other. When the
meeting reached it’s third hour and had gone past noon, Walsh looked at Moustis.

“He said, you know, I’m a farmer, we eat lunch,” Moustis recalled with a laugh.

He said Walsh always warmly greeted people and would make a point to ask about their
families.

“He was a kind and thoughtful man,” Moustis said. “He really was.”

A lifelong farmer, Walsh’s love for farming occasionally took him and others on what he
called “windshield farming” tours, when Walsh would get off the interstate an exit early
when driving to an event so he could pass farms. Walsh would talk about the farms, crops
and how things looked, Palmer said.

During his tenure in the Senate, Walsh led efforts on a variety of issues including funding
local agencies to improve the quality of life for residents with special needs.

As county executive, he led efforts to improve the county’s financial health, which in turn
led to the largest capital improvements campaign in the county’s history that involved
road and bridge improvements. He also implemented the county’s building program that
has included a new Public Safety Facility housing the Will County sheriff’s office, anew
county Health Department and a soon-to-be completed courthouse.

Walsh is survived by Irene, his wife of 50 years, and their five sons, Larry Jr. (Theresa),
Frank (Micki), Matthew (Danielle), Brian (Brandy), Shawn (Amy), and daughter Sarah
(Kyle) Horton. The couple also had 20 grandchildren and numerous extended family mem-
bers.

Walsh Jr. said a funeral Mass for his father will be private but plans are being made for a
public visitation.

Will County Board members have tentatively scheduled a special board meeting for 9:30
a.m. Monday to declare a vacancy for the county executive post. At the same meeting, the

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200605/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 18. Accolades pour in after death of Will executive

board would appoint someone to fill out the remainder of Walsh’s term, which expires at
the end of this year, said Will County Board Speaker Denise Winfrey.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200605/page/1/textview 3/3
