2020. 6. 18. Leaders make call for strength, unity South suburban community officials condemn violence

Leaders make call for strength, unity South suburban com-
munity officials condemn violence

Daily Southtown - 4 Jun 2020 - 1 - Ted Slowik

South suburban community leaders are reacting with words and actions in response to re-
cent events that have heightened racial tensions and contributed to unrest in the region
and throughout the nation.

SS

 

   

 

 

 

Some remarks addressed the distinction between demonstrators exercising their rights to
express free speech and criminals taking advantage of volatile situations to rob businesses.
“T support peaceful protest as a method of expression,” Cook County Commissioner Donna
Miller, D-Lynwood, said in a statement issued Tuesday. “I do not condone the looting and
violence that has occurred.”

People who have experienced racism are understandably frustrated and angry about unjust
institutions, Miller wrote.

“We all need to commit to work together and turn this just anger into meaningful action
and lasting change for the betterment of our communities,” she wrote.

Actions by local officials have included imposing curfews in numerous towns, blocking
streets to restrict access to stores and mobilizing police to protect property. Some agencies
have earned praise for their responses.

“Thanks to officers and (the) fire department and city administration for a job well done,”
Jack of Orland Park said in comments for the Daily Southtown’s Speak Out forum. “Quickly
shutting down LaGrange Road and the mall Sunday and notifying residents by phone and
email to stay home prevented almost all looting.”

Blue Island, Burbank, Calumet City, Chicago Heights, Chicago Ridge, Oak Lawn, Orland
Park and Tinley Park are among south suburban communities that enacted curfews this
week.

Some words seemed especially powerful because of who said them, such as a police official
who condemned the actions of police officers.

“T think it’s important to let our community know that what happened in the situation in-
volving George Floyd is vile, inexcusable and sickening,” Frankfort police Chief John
Burica wrote on a social media page for the Frankfort Police Department.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200604/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 18. Leaders make call for strength, unity South suburban community officials condemn violence

“Repulsive, intolerable and heartless,” were other words Burica used to describe the ac-
tions of the Minneapolis police officers who have been charged in connection with Floyd’s
death May 25.

“These officers’ contempt for this life is both disheartening and nauseating,” Burica
wrote.

Burica wrote that Frankfort police officers were professionals who were trained in de-es-
calation tactics and who sought to engage in dialogue with people in the community.
“Police officers’ jobs are to protect and serve their community, and although it is a

“We all need to commit to work together and turn this just anger into meaningful action
and lasting change for the betterment of our communities”

Donna Miller, D-Lynwood

tough job one must not lose sight of the oath we all took,” he wrote.

Burica told me he felt he needed to express his thoughts after seeing video of a Minneapo-
lis officer kneeling on Floyd’s neck for nearly nine minutes. He worked on the post at home
during the weekend, he said.

“T spent about an hour in my kitchen Saturday afternoon working on that,” he told me
Wednesday.

Some words seemed particularly thoughtful due to the skill and talent of the people who
wrote them. Park Forest Trustee Joseph Woods delivered moving remarks Monday night
during a village board meeting. All Park Forest trustees shared their thoughts on current
events, Mayor Jonathan Vanderbilt told me.

“He does have a way with words,” Vanderbilt said.

A poem that Woods wrote, “Black Goes With Everything,” is published on the Illinois Sec-
retary of State website. In 2005, he was honored with a Gwendolyn Brooks Poetry Award in
the annual Illinois Emerging Writers Competition.

Woods provided a copy of the remarks he shared during the village board meeting.

“How peculiar that there is more discourse about the reaction to pain, rather than the pain
itself,” he wrote, in part.

Woods wrote that racism was endemic in America, just as the coronavirus was a pandemic.
“My fervent hope is that we develop a vaccine to eliminate systems of injustice, rather
than build a generational immune system tolerant of systemic racism,” he wrote.

Some official responses shared on social media seemed to strike a good balance of being
both informative and reassuring.

“Monee residents, as we all watch with great concern, civil unrest is unfolding throughout
the metro area and extending into parts of the south suburbs,” the Village of Monee Police
Department posted on its Facebook page at 4:17 p.m. Sunday.

“It is sad that these criminal acts overshadow the peaceful and lawful actions being taken
in response to the tragic events that occurred in Minneapolis,” the department posted.
“Monee PD is fully staffed during these events and will respond to all calls for service as
needed.”

Some communities opted to share information without any additional commentary. A post
on the Village of South Holland Facebook page at 3:22 p.m. Tuesday notified motorists that

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200604/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 18. Leaders make call for strength, unity South suburban community officials condemn violence

highway exits into the community were being closed due to reports that people planned to
march onto Interstate 80/94 and block traffic.

“Because of the potential for civil unrest, the village of South Holland and all surrounding
municipalities are temporarily closing all expressway off-ramps until the potential threat
passes,” according to the post.

State Rep. Thaddeus Jones, D-Calumet City, asked people Wednesday in a post on Facebook
what legislative policy changes they would like to see.

“As a member of the Illinois Legislative Black Caucus, I am committed to addressing
racism in our government (education, investment in black communities, police
accountability, etc.),” Jones wrote.

Some local officials seemed to express a desire to engage in conversation, even while ac-
knowledging the difficulty in finding the right words to say at this moment. Woods, the
Park Forest trustee, wrote that he appreciated the opportunity “to think big thoughts of
effectuating change in a small way.

“And in the words of Gwendolyn Brooks, ‘What else is there to say, but everything,’ ” he
wrote.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/20200604/page/1/textview 3/3
