2020. 6. 18. Some pools opening — reservation required?

Some pools opening — reservation required?
Restrictions prompt park districts to have patrons call ahead

Daily Southtown « 12 Jun 2020 - 1 - By Mike Nolan

With new guidelines laid out by state health officials, some south suburban public pools
are reopening, but with a bevy of restrictions.

  
  

Oak Lawn Park District officials recently reopened the district’s Central Park pool, and Or-
land Park is opening its indoor pool at its Health & Fitness Center on Friday followed by the
outdoor pool at Centennial Park on Monday.

The Illinois Department of Public Health has said that state-licensed pools can open for
activities such as lap swimming, diving, swim lessons and swim team practices.

But restrictions on how many people can be in the pool are prompting some park districts,
such as Oak Lawn, to require residents to call ahead for reservations for lap swimming.

No more than 10 people at a time are being allowed in the pool, 9400 S. Kenton Ave., and
swimmers have to don a face mask when they’re not in the water.

“It’s very restrictive and very frustrating, but we’re glad to have people back in the pool,”
Maddie Kelly, the district’s executive director, said Thursday. “Hopefully we’ll be able to
get back to normal and have open family swim.”

Orland Park’s Health & Fitness Center, 15430 West Ave., has a warm-water therapy pool
and an adjacent pool for lap swimming, but center members will have to call ahead to re-
serve a time and masks will be required to be worn, although not while in the water, ac-
cording to the village.

The Centennial Park Aquatic Center, 15600 West Ave., opens Monday for lap swimming on
a first-come, first-served basis during two time slots, from 6:15 to 7:10 a.m., and from
7:20 to 8:15 a.m., according to Nabeha Zegar, village spokeswoman. The pool is then re-
served for swimming lessons, but more lap times could be freed up

depending on how many people take part in swim lessons, she said.

Water slides are not yet open at the center, and social distancing is being used for individ-
ual swimmers as well as swim lessons, according to the village.

“The hope is in the near future we can open up to a larger capacity” Zegar said.

Park Forest officials last month decided to cancel the summer season at the village’s public
pools.

While pools are being allowed to open on a limited basis under Phase 3 of the state’s re-
opening plan, splash pads, such as those operated by park districts in Frankfort and Mo-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/2020061 2/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. Some pools opening — reservation required?

kena, can’t resume operating until Phase 4, which could come by the end of this month.
Playground equipment also is still off limits although many other parks facilities have re-
opened around the state and Chicago suburbs.

“There is a great frustration among the residents that the playground equipment remains
closed,” said Gina Hassett, executive director of the Frankfort Park District.

Adding to the frustration, she said, is recent guidance from the U.S. Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention that minimizes hard surfaces as a major source of spreading the
coronavirus.

The Blue Island Park District had planned construction at its pool at Memorial Park, 12804
S. Highland Ave., well before the COVID-19 pandemic, and completion of the work was de-
layed as a result, according to Thomas Wogan, the district’s executive director.

Work should be completed in the next couple of weeks, with the district board making a
decision at that point about reopening, he said.

Park Forest’s decision last month to cancel the 2020 season for its village pools was due in
part to the pandemic as well as an effort by officials to cut the village’s budget in anticipa-
tion of reduced revenues because of COVID-19.

Officials said late last month they were eliminating $2.2 million in expenses, including the
$270,000 cost of operating the Aqua Center, which doesn’t make money for the village but
is subsidized by taxpayers. Park Forest officials said that virtually all planned capital
spending was being suspended and a hiring freeze implemented in response to an expected
drop in revenues.

While Orland Park isn’t playing the role of renegade in reopening its pools, the village’s
mayor and other elected officials in the suburb have bristled at state reopening guidelines
they contend are moving too slowly.

Mayor Keith Pekau, in a video message posted at the village’s website Wednesday, said Or-
land Park had attained the metrics needed to move on to Phase 4 as early as Friday.

A Republican, Pekau was critical in the message of what he called Gov. J.B. Pritzker’s
“hypocrisy” of preaching social distancing while taking part in large, well-attended
demonstrations in the south suburbs following the death of George Floyd.

He was called for businesses such as restaurants and movie theaters to be allowed to re-
sume indoor seating, with social distancing rules in place.

“The people of Orland Park are more than capable of exercising good judgement,” he said.
While many communities have canceled largescale summer events, Orland Park plans a
series of concerts at Centennial Park West, beginning July 18, and will go ahead with a
Fourth of July fireworks show at Centennial Park.

Vehicle parking at the Centennial and Centennial West lots will be restricted to only vehi-
cles displaying a village vehicle sticker, and, for the first time, the village will livestream
the fireworks show.

“There are people who will not feel comfortable coming out and we didn’t want them to
miss out,” Zegar said.

Officials recommend that families or other groups attending keep to fewer than 10 and
keep sufficient space between groups.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/2020061 2/page/1/textview 2/2
