2020. 6. 18. PROTESTERS DEMAND POLICE CHANGES

PROTESTERS DEMAND POLICE CHANGES

Calls for dialogue in Hampton Roads city with history of stormy race rela-
tions

Daily Press - 1 Jun 2020 - 1 - By Josh Reyes Siaff writer

PORTSMOUTH — Demonstrators marched through Portsmouth and onto Interstate 264
Saturday night as they chanted, “I can’t breathe,” and “No justice, no peace,” joining sim-
ilar efforts across the country in the wake of the death of George Floyd.

ay M3
'

  
  

‘a
Floyd, a black and unarmed man, died after a Minneapolis police officer kneeled on his
neck for close to nine minutes.

“We're avenging (Floyd’s) death and avenging other people who died at the same hands,”
said James Boyd, president of the Portsmouth NAACP and an organizer of the march.

The crowd began at I.C. Norcom High School and proceeded onto High Street to the
Portsmouth Police Department building and then onto the interstate to block the Down-
town Tunnel. Periodically, the group stopped for different speakers to share experiences
and encourage the crowd to demand justice from those in power.

Throughout the march, there was little, if any, direct interaction between police officers
and the demonstrators. Police vehicles blocked off streets and intersections to separate the
crowd from traffic. When the crowd was on the interstate, police and fire department vehi-
cles stayed far back. Police officers appeared to remain in their vehicles throughout the
twohour demonstration.

Still, leaders of the march talked about the Portsmouth police. While standing in front of
the department’s building, they shared a list of demands they said they previously pro-
vided to Police Chief Angela Greene.

The NAACP has called for public information about officers who have faced discipline and
used force on the job, the hiring of a black police captain and a new head of the police
department’s internal affairs investigations. They also called for a use-of-force policy that
specifically bans kneeling on a person’s neck. Boyd said police regulations that use broad
language can equate to legalized murder.

As they discussed the death of Floyd and the officer charged with killing him and other in-
stances of police officers killing unarmed black people — specifically naming Breonna
Taylor, Botham Jean, Michael Brown and Eric Garner — they discussed issues in
Portsmouth.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200601/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. PROTESTERS DEMAND POLICE CHANGES

At least one demonstrator carried a sign commemorating William Chapman II, an 18-
yearold who was shot and killed outside a Walmart in 2015. The officer who shot him,
Stephen Rankin, was convicted of manslaughter.

Boyd said racism is a pervasive issue in Portsmouth, citing the resignation of former police
chief Tonya Chapman. Chapman said her

resignation was forced. She said she observed racial tensions in the department, leading to
an FBI investigation.

Boyd said he was glad the march was peaceful and shocked it was not prevented or directed
in any way by the police, but now the ball is in their court to make changes in the depart-
ment.

Leaders of the march emphasized the need for continued action and pressure to make
changes. They thanked non-black allies for attending, chanting and listening and charged
them to talk in their communities about the injustices and inequities that black people
face.

As the crowd marched down High Street, some diners on restaurant patios joined in after
being challenged to do so by marchers, and residents of homes and apartments cheered
them on from their windows and porches. Employees of restaurants and stores came out-
ontothesidewalktotake videos with their phones and applaud.

“Portsmouth looks good tonight,” one man said as he observed the crowd.

Josh Reyes, 757-247-4692, joreyes@dailypress.com

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-press/20200601/page/1/textview 2/2
