2020. 6. 18. Midewin for Kids

Midewin for Kids

Sessions brings nation’s first National Tallgrass Prairie to young learners
nationwide

Daily Southtown - 12 Jun 2020 - 1 - By Jack Murray

An 11-year-old boy staying with his grandmother for the summer in Tucson, Arizona, logs
in to learn about animals that live on the largest prairie operated by the U.S. Forest Service
in Illinois.

   
 

ee! 7 iy Fe
Across the country, at her home in northern Virginia, a girl entering second grade joins to
see the insects that pollinate plants and wildflowers that grow on one of the largest public
open spaces in the Chicago area.
Done with kindergarten, a 5-year-old boy in River Forest tunes in to explore the 5,000
acres of restored prairie in the first national tallgrass prairie designated in the United
States.
All are classmates connected to the first online distance education program for children
produced at Midewin National Tallgrass Prairie near Elwood.
Midewin for Kids will present 27 sessions, each 15 to 20 minutes long, on topics related to
the prairie and conservation of natural resources through Aug. 6. Sessions start at 11 a.m.
and end with an activity, such as making a craft.
“T was searching for a virtual camp. I wanted to find an activity to keep him busy, to learn
something great about our natural
resources and how to make a positive impact on the planet,” Davina Diaz explained why
she enrolled her grandson, Bronson, in the course.
“T like to learn about the Earth, the planet that we are on,” Bronson said. Entering sixth
grade, the avid science student plans to watch every Midewin for Kids telecast. “I’m most
interested in toads and frogs, and fossils, too.”
Siobhan Solkowski-Peacy, visitor information specialist at Midewin, designed and in-
structs the course, which began on Tuesday.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/2020061 2/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 18. Midewin for Kids

“Things you find at Midewin” make up most of the content, she said. “We went with what
we had. For instance, coyotes are nocturnal, so in ‘Walk Like an Animal,’ we learn to look
for their tracks.”

“Fun with Fossils,” for ages 5-12, began the series. The curriculum also includes sessions
about toads and frogs, birds, pondlife, butterflies, dragonflies, coyotes, other mammals
and the roots of prairie plants. “Prairie Detectives,” “Beaver Tales, “Prairie Picassos,”
“Crayfish Corner” and “Just Batty” are among program titles.

During each session, Peacy reads fictional stories related to that episode’s topic, adding
facts to teach kids about it, she said. Photos and film clips illustrate parts of the narrative.
“They learn about all about the tallgrass prairie, a very special place and rare ecosystem,”
she said.

“The Bison Project” will cover the introduction of a small herd to Midewin prairie in Octo-
ber 2015 as a 20-year ecological experiment to determine how their grazing benefits the
prairie habitat. A bison webcam covers areas where the bovines are known to graze, but
sightings are rare. Commonly called buffalo, they were hunted nearly to extinction on the
Great Plains in the 1800s. The bison was named the national mammal of the United States
in a law signed by President Obama in May 2016.

Camille McLamb and her family saw two bison in the distance when they visited Midewin
on a Saturday in late May. “You need to bring binoculars,” she said.

She enrolled her son, Sawyer, in the virtual course. “I stumbled across it when I was look-
ing at Midewin’s website and planning our visit,” she said. “A lot of our summer camps
have cancelled, and I was on the lookout for programs that I thought would be interesting
for him.”

Midewin for Kids is limited to about 100 pupils. People can register until the course fills.
Email SM.FS.Midewin_RSVP@usda.gov or call 815-423-6370. Provide your name and
email address to be contacted with connection information.

“Accessibility is a priority. When people register for a program, they can tell us if closed
captioning or other assistive technology will be needed and we will make arrangements,”
said Veronica Hinke, Midewin’s public affairs officer and public services team leader. Vir-
tual programming is an important tool in conservation education, Hinke said. “We are able
to connect people from several states away to Midewin National Tallgrass Prairie.

“Many of them would never have the chance to visit, however through virtual programs
young learners, as well as moms, dads and other caretakers, can become connected with
this special place and many of the natural resources benefits here.

“What I love about Midewin for Kids is the bandwidth of subjects.

From the surprisingly long roots of prairie plants to the birds that fly in the sky, there are
dozens of topics that will be covered this year.”

Midewin (pronounced mi-DAYwin) is the name of a society of healers for the Potawatomi,
historic residents of this part of Illinois.

Still a work in progress, the restoration has reclaimed as tall grass prairie 5,000 of
Midewin’s 18,500 acres on the site of the Joliet Army Ammunition Plant, inactivated by

1993.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/2020061 2/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 18. Midewin for Kids

Although the Midewin National Tallgrass Prairie is not closed to visitors, the USDA Forest
Service has closed offices and is providing virtual services during the COVID-19 outbreak.
Recreational uses include hiking, bicycling and horseback riding trails. The prairie is alsoa
haven for birdwatchers.

Meanwhile, Kimberly Winter, NatureWatch national program manager for the forest ser-
vice, didn’t go far from her field to register her daughter, Myla, in the Midewin for Kids
program. “I was searching online for a long time for a nature-based learning opportunity
for children,” Winter said. “I’m a wildlife ecologist and my daughter is taking after me.
“She wants to learn more about animals and plants. She’s a fan of ‘Wild Kratts’ and ex-
plores nature in our backyard.” The PBS television show aims to teach children about ecol-
ogy and saving animals.

A transplanted Midwesterner, Winter lives outside Washington, D.C., and grows prairie
plants in her pollinator garden to attract caterpillars, butterflies and honeybees.

“T grew up in St. Louis and wanted to keep a little touch of the Midwest,” she said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/daily-southtown/2020061 2/page/1/textview 3/3
