2020. 6. 17. Fired officer is arrested on murder charge

Fired officer is arrested on murder charge

Houston Chronicle - 30 May 2020 - A1 - By Robert Klemko and Brady Dennis

MINNEAPOLIS — Authorities on Friday filed murder charges against former Minneapolis
police officer Derek Chauvin, who was captured on video earlier this week atop 46-year-
old George Floyd, pressing his knee into Floyd’s neck until the unarmed and handcuffed
black man could no longer plead for breath.

   

Floyd, who was suspected of trying to use a counterfeit $20 bill at a local deli, later died,
and Chauvin and three other officers were fired. What many consid

ered an egregious police abuse provoked a wave of protests across the United States as the
nation wrestles not only with a devastating pandemic and an economic crisis but also a
much older, more intractable scourge: racial injustice.

Though the charges against Chauvin of third-degree murder and second-degree man-
slaughter came swiftly in legal terms — “We have never charged a case in that time
frame,” Minnesota Public Safety Commissioner John Harrington told reporters Friday —
the perceived delay led to large demonstrations in cities across the country.

It remained unclear whether Chauvin’s arrest might help to quell the mournful, angry and
at times violent gatherings that have upended Minneapolis, Louisville, Denver and other
cities in recent days. The protests, while triggered by Floyd’s death, also have been fueled
by the ever-growing list of black people whose deaths at the hands of white police officers
have been documented on video and distributed widely on the Internet.

The video in Minneapolis drew widespread condemnation from police authorities, politi-
cians and countless viewers, who watched Chauvin press Floyd into the pavement during
an arrest. Investigators revealed Friday that Chauvin kept his knee on Floyd’s neck for 8
minutes and 46 seconds, even as Floyd repeatedly muttered “I can’t breathe,” “Mama”
and “please.” Floyd eventually lost consciousness, and Chauvin kept his knee firmly on
Floyd’s neck for more than two more minutes, according to investigators.

Autopsy results

At the same time, an autopsy did not “support a diagnosis of traumatic asphyxia or stran-
gulation,” according to the criminal complaint against Chauvin, meaning it did not appear
that his airway was fully cut off.

“Mr. Floyd had underlying health conditions including coronary artery disease and hyper-
tensive heart disease,” the statement said. “The combined effects of

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200530/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Fired officer is arrested on murder charge

Mr. Floyd being restrained by the police, his underlying health conditions and any poten-
tial intoxicants in his system likely contributed to this death.”

Hennepin County Attorney Mike Freeman signaled Friday that three other officers who
were fired after the incident — Thomas Lane, Tou Thao and Alexander Kueng — also could
soon face criminal charges.

“We are in the process of continuing to review the evidence. There may be subsequent
charges later,” Freeman said, adding that his office focused first on “the most dangerous
perpetrator.”

Agents with the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehension arrested Chauvin at 11:44
a.m. in Minneapolis, officials announced. In Minnesota, a thirddegree murder charge is
defined as “perpetrating an eminently dangerous act and evincing a depraved mind,”
while second-degree manslaughter is defined as “culpable negligence creating unreason-
able risk.”

Benjamin Crump, an attorney for Floyd’s family, called the charges “a welcome but
overdue step on the road to justice” but said the family had expected a first-degree murder
charge.

“The pain that the black community feels over this murder and what it reflects about the
treatment of black people in America is raw and is spilling out onto streets across Amer-
ica,” he said.

The charges in Floyd’s death followed three days of increasingly intense protests and calls
from community members, including Minneapolis Mayor Jacob Frey, a Democrat, for the
officers to be arrested. Freeman acknowledged the ongoing civil unrest, noting that his
own home had been picketed, but insisted his office could only pursue cases with sufficient
evidence.

“T’m not insensitive to what’s happened in the street,” he said. “But I will not allow us to
charge a case before it’s ready. And this case is now ready.”

Minnesota Gov. Tim Walz, a Democrat, acknowledged in an emotional news conference
Friday that the unrest that has destabilized the Twin Cities is the result of “generations of
pain, of anguish” over racism in policing.

“Their voices went unheard, and now generations of pain is manifesting itself in front of
the world,” Walz said. “And the world is watching.”

The governor vowed “swift” justice for the officers involved in Floyd’s killing, even as he
pleaded for an end to the violence that has followed in its wake. He said the underlying is-
sues involved in Floyd’s death could not be addressed until the literal fires are extin-
guished.

“We cannot have the looting and the recklessness that went on. We can’t have it because
we cannot function as a society,” Walz said. “And I refuse to let it take away the attention
from the stain that we need to be working on.”

Minnesota Attorney General Keith Ellison, a Democrat, on Friday encouraged residents to
see the state’s National Guard, which Walz activated late Thursday, as a calming force
rather than an occupying one.

Even President Donald Trump, who sparked sharp criticism for tweets early Friday that
appeared to threaten violence against looters, later in the afternoon urged restraint.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200530/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Fired officer is arrested on murder charge

“We can’t allow a situation like what happened in Minneapolis to descend further into
lawless anarchy and chaos,” said Trump, who noted that he had spoken with Floyd’s fam-
ily.

“T understand the hurt, I understand the pain,” he said. “The family of George is entitled
to justice and the people of Minnesota are entitled to live in safety. Law and order will pre-
vail.”

While most protests have remained peaceful, some demonstrators have damaged build-
ings, blocked traffic and demanded justice for Floyd and for other victims of police vio-
lence.

Nationwide protests

At the center of the fury was Minneapolis, where protesters on Thursday breached the po-
lice department’s 3rd Precinct, set fire to the building and launched fireworks toward po-
lice, forcing officers to evacuate.

The unrest unfolded from Phoenix to Los Angeles to Columbus, Ohio, as hundreds of peo-
ple converged in city centers and descended on state capitol buildings in the face of tear
gas and rubber bullets from police.

Gunfire broke out in multiple cities, including Louisville, where police say seven people
were injured in a shooting that sent dozens scattering. Several hundred people there were
protesting the March fatal police shooting of Breonna Taylor in her apartment, which po-
lice entered while she was asleep.

Shots also were fired near a crowd in Denver on Thursday evening, but a police spokesman
said no one was injured. Late into the night, officials pleaded with protesters to remain
peaceful.

By Friday afternoon, protests denouncing incidents of black people dying in police custody
continued to draw thousands around the country, with demonstrations forming in Atlanta,
Milwaukee, Houston and elsewhere.

In New York City, where police said more than 70 arrests or summonses were made during
Thursday night protests and where video captured more arrests Friday, hundreds gathered
in and around Foley Square as the mother of Eric Garner addressed the crowd. Garner, a
black man, died in a 2014 struggle with police after repeatedly crying out, “I can’t
breathe.”

“They have to stop coming into our neighborhoods and brutalizing, terrorizing, murder-
ing,” Gwen Carr said through a megaphone in front of the plaza’s fountain. She wore a
mask that said, “I can’t breathe.”

“It just keeps happening over and over again,” Carr added. “We can’t do this anymore. ...
We have to take a stand.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200530/page/1/textview 3/3
