2020. 6. 17. FUNERAL

FUNERAL
Family, leaders promise to bring justice, change

Houston Chronicle - 10 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Joy Sewing, Brittany Britto, Brooke Lewis, Shelby Webb, Marcy de Luna and St.
John Barned-Smith STAFF WRITERS

The young girl in white squared herself at the podium above George Perry Floyd Jr.’s casket
and looked out at the hundreds of masked mourners who had gathered to honor her uncle.

  

Bram Ve! "ieee at aie
“My name is Brooke Williams,” she said. “I can breathe. As long as I can breathe, justice
will be served for Perry.”
After weeks of tumult over Floyd’s death beneath a police officer’s knee in Minnesota, his
relatives and friends gathered in southwest Houston at The Fountain of Praise to mourn.
They grieved a son of Third Ward, an everyday man whose death made him an interna-
tional force against police brutality. They called out his brutal end.
“The officers showed no remorse watching my uncle’s soul leave his body,” Williams said,
her voice filled
with the resolve that has fueled hundreds of thousands of marchers. “He begged and
pleaded many times, just for you to get up, but you just pushed harder.”
But despite the pain, the funeral felt different from the last two weeks. It was a homegoing.
The private ceremony livestreamed to the public was a fullthrottle four-hour service filled
with huge-voiced gospel and a succession of pastors and politicians exhorting the congre-
gation. It was a moment of shared grief and shared resolve, of hope and remembrance; a
chance to honor a Houston son.
But also a moment of witness, and an indictment.
‘Why must this system be corrupt and broken?” Williams asked.
Condemnation of Trump
Other mourners echoed that raw emotion, condemnation ringing from the pulpit during
the service.
“This was not just a tragedy,” said the Rev. Al Sharpton, who delivered the eulogy. “It was
a crime.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/2020061 0/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. FUNERAL

Sharpton, robed in white, took the pulpit in the fourth hour of the service. He packed in eu-
logy, history, an attack on racism, and a fierce indictment of the Trump administration,
including the recent clearing of protesters near the White House so that President Donald
Trump could pose in front of a church with a Bible.

“You’re scheming on how you can spin the story rather than you can achieve justice,” he
said. “... To clear out peaceful protesters and then take a Bible and walk in front of a church
and use a church as a prop — wickedness in high places.”

He paused during the eulogy and asked those in attendance to recognize the family mem-
bers of other black victims of violence.

Sharpton asked them to stand one by one: the mother of Trayvon Martin, the mother of
Eric Garner, the sister of Botham Jean, the family of Pamela Turner, the father of Michael
Brown and the father of Anmaud Arbery. Applause built with each name.

“All of these families came to stand with this family,” Sharpton said. “Because they know
better than anyone else the pain they will suffer from the loss they have gone through.

He criticized Trump for calling for a tough approach to protests against police brutality in-
stead of trying to bring the country together.

“When some kids wrongly start violence that this family doesn’t condone, the president
talks about bringing in the military,” Sharpton said. “But he’s not said one word about
eight minutes and 46 seconds of police murder of George Floyd.”

In a videotaped address, former Vice President Joe Biden offered his condolences to Floyd’s
family. He said the pain of the moment would become a “purpose” for Floyd’s loved ones
to “change the world.”

“No child should have to ask the question that too many black children have had to ask for
generations: ‘Why? Why is Daddy gone?’ ” the presumptive Democratic presidential nomi-
nee said. “When there is justice for George Floyd, we will truly be on our way to racial jus-
tice in America,” he said.

When he spoke, Mayor Sylvester Turner said Floyd’s death and the outpouring of anguish
that followed had prompted politicians across the nation to new action.

“We honor him not because he was perfect, but we honor him today because when he took
his last breath, the rest of us will now be able to breathe,” Turner said.

He promised to sign an executive order implementing several police reforms, including
banning the use of chokeholds, requiring Houston police officers to warn suspects before
shooting, requiring them to try to de-escalate situations.

He also praised the family for seeking justice for Floyd while at the same time asking peo-
ple all around the world to protest peacefully.

“We owe a great deal of gratitude to this family,” he said. “And I want to say thank you.”
By the end his voice was rising with each word to applause.

Congresswoman Sheila Jackson Lee, D-Houston, also acknowledged the throngs of pro-
testers who have filled the streets over the few weeks.

“Many of them could not be in this place. They are black and brown. They are Asian. They
are white,” she said. “They are protesting and marching, and I’m saying, as a mama, I
hear your cry.”

‘Thank you, George’

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/2020061 0/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. FUNERAL

In addition to the congregation inside, mourners gathered outside.

Garland Victor, 52, of Katy, sat outside of the church, blasting the livestream of the ser-
vices through his motorcycle.

He felt compelled to attend, he said.

“This coulda been me, my son, my father,” Victor said. “I just want to be here for support
in any way, shape, form or fashion. ... If it was me in that casket, I’d appreciate any and ev-
erybody just letting me know my life meant something.”

Terrance Burney, 36, held a sign that read “We See Greatness in You” and “We Will
Breathe.”

He stood outside the church’s glass windows, hoping Floyd’s family and those entering
might see his messages.

“We're tired of not breathing,” said Burney, an organizer originally from Detroit. He said
he attended protests in Minneapolis and threw community events in Los Angeles, where he
now lives. Monday night, he flew into Houston hoping to spread positivity at Floyd’s fu-
neral, and planned to return home Tuesday night.

“We're tired of seeing these things,” Burney said, referring to police brutality. “We need a
big change and reform.” But big dreams, he said, require group effort. Another out-of-
town mourner, Nuredin Giayash drove from Tulsa, Okla., to honor Floyd.

Floyd’s death “made me cry and made me sick,” Giayash said.

The 64-year-old, who was born in Libya, is hoping Floyd’s death signals a turning point.
“You have to stand out for justice,” he said. “Without justice, no peace, no life, no dignity,
no living together. We have to make a difference.”

Florence Bamidele-Orji, 57, a Houston resident originally from Nigeria, waved goodbye to
the hearse that carried Floyd’s casket.

“Thank you, George. Great warrior!” she yelled, as the hearse passed. “Thank you for
bringing us together.”

‘We won’t stop’

In the minutes after the hearse passed into Silver Lake Community Church, some in the
crowd grew restless and spilled into the intersection. The crowd took turns chanting
Floyd’s name and “black lives matter!” fanning themselves with homemade posters and
wiping sweat from their eyes.

The crowd quieted as the procession began the final mile to the grave site.

Four men in pressed black suits led the procession, followed by about a half-dozen Pear-
land Police Department bicycle officers and four other suited escorts. Two white horses,
each adorned with a simple black feather head covering, pulled the windowed carriage
hearse. Floyd’s golden casket gleamed inside.

Onlookers perched on the median and along the road, standing nearly shoulder to shoulder
on one side for more than a mile. They waved at the cars in the procession, while others
held their fists in the air in solidarity.

‘We love you,” one woman in the crowd shouted toward the first black SUVs to follow the
hearses. A woman in the car nodded and waved. “We’re fighting for you, and we won’t
stop!”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/2020061 0/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. FUNERAL

Some in the processional held their fists outside windows, and others gestured for cheers.
Many looked somber, clutching tissues and acknowledging the crowd’s support with weak
smiles.

Delayne Green had been upset about high-profile instances of police brutality against
black men in the past, but something in her changed after watching the video of Floyd
struggling on the pavement. The time that ticked by without mercy, she said, flicked a
switch in her mind.

“There was no mercy. There was just no mercy,” Green said. “No human deserves to die
that way; I don’t care what color your skin is.”

Green’s 2-year-old son, Kristian, bounced around on her lap, wriggling to reach another
binky to pop into his mouth. She said she followed all the rules people tell you to when
having a kid — she waited until her finances were in order and until she was confident she
could raise a thoughtful young man. But now she worries for him, and her husband, too.
“No matter how much we raise him in the church, or how kind we teach him to be, he’s
still going to be seen in some people’s eyes as a threat,” Green said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/2020061 0/page/1/textview 4/4
