2020. 6. 17. Tomlinson: Grievances are legitimate.

Tomlinson: Grievances are legitimate.

Houston Chronicle - 3 Jun 2020 - A1 - CHRIS TOMLINSON

We could not have created a more perfect recipe for violent protests if we tried.

 

The gap between rich and poor never has been greater. Our justice system disproportion-
ately punishes minorities and lowincome people, and our economic system exploits the
average person’s ignorance. Americans are frustrated.

If you refuse to recognize the nation’s class and ethnic divisions, you need to squeeze your
eyelids together a little tighter these days. The outpouring of rage and the oppression of
protesters reveal the consequences of the most extreme income inequality shown in the
past century by U.S. census data.

While it’s a cliché, it all begins at school. Live in a wealthy school district, you get an excel-
lent education. Live in a poor area, you are more likely to become a minimum-wage
worker.

The minimum wage, meanwhile, has not kept up with inflation, otherwise, it would be $13
an hour. Conservatives have kept it at $7.25, and they’ve systematically dismantled laws
guaranteeing workers the right to organize unions. Underpaid people become angry pro-
testers.

Billionaire Warren Buffet pays a lower tax rate than his secretary, which even he thinks is
wrong. People who perform physical labor pay more of their income in taxes than those
who do nothing but watch their investment’s capital gains grow. Americans notice, and
they know it’s unfair.

Credit card companies and banks then come along and offer people the high life through
expensive, confusing and exploitative lending programs. Hidden fees, adjustable interest
rates and punitive overdraft charges hoodwink millions of Americans and leave them feel-
ing ripped off.

For those who blame the consumer, I refer you to item No. 1: We do not teach financial lit-
eracy.

Making matters worse are investment firms buying up houses and driving up property val-
ues. Owning a home is out of reach for many working-class Americans. Rents also are ris-
ing faster than wages, which explains the growing homeless camps downtown. Any down-
town.

Then if you get seriously ill or injured, you might as well kiss your assets goodbye. Most
low-income workers do not get employer-sponsored health care, and Republican leaders
have made access to Medicaid difficult. Even if you have insurance, though, your share of
the bill likely will ruin you.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200603/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Tomlinson: Grievances are legitimate.

The coronavirus pandemic only has made our system’s inequities more apparent. In the
beginning, NBA players and other wealthy people could get a COVID-19 test when
paramedics and police could not.

If you’ve got an office job and an internet connection, you can work from home. If you are
an essential worker, you’re probably working without the correct protective equipment. If
you are not essential, you’ve probably lost a job that is not coming back.

More than half of African American adults now are jobless, the Economic Policy Institute
reports.

All of this is enough to make anyone want to scream in the streets. But then comes a video
where a police officer kills a handcuffed citizen while bystanders beg for mercy. People 10
feet away could see George Floyd was dying, but the people in power ignored them.
Floyd’s death is a metaphor for how tens of millions of Americans feel every day.

Black Lives Matters and other civil rights groups have peacefully protested for years, de-
manding real criminal justice. Occupy Wall Street and low-income workers have peacefully
protested for years demanding economic justice. Peaceful protests have failed to produce
substantive change.

I’ve covered hundreds of peaceful protests, and guess what? No one cared. The civil rights
movement only gained traction when police resorted to violence. ACT UP only drew atten-
tion to HIV when protesters disrupted people’s lives.

I’ve reported on political unrest in more than a dozen countries. The moment citizens lose
faith in their government to guarantee fairness is when protests turn violent. When we ig-
nore peaceful demonstrations, we instigate violent ones because that is the only thing that
gets our attention.

President Donald Trump’s declaration equating violent protesters with domestic terrorists
and his promise of martial law are directly out of the African and Middle Eastern dictators’
playbook. These steps will not address the legitimate grievances and only will create polit-
ical prisoners.

The real solutions are simple if we stand up to the oligarchy. Provide better schools, im-
pose a reasonable minimum wage, supply universal health care, transform our criminal
justice system, and pay for it with higher taxes on the wealthiest people and companies.
Capitalism never was supposed to be a zero-sum game, with a few winners hoarding all
the wealth. Our system is broken, and we need a capitalism that encourages competition
and innovation, and by definition, that should lead to a more even distribution of wealth.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200603/page/1/textview 2/2
