2020. 6. 17. Wedding industry jilted as pandemic shrivels sales

Wedding industry jilted as pandemic shrivels sales
Venues waiting for fall as summer heat, virus hurt key season

Houston Chronicle - 26 May 2020 - A1 - By Amanda Drane STAFF WRITER

Like many brides, Grace Gibson spent a year laying out the details of her July wedding in
Belize. But then the new coronavirus arrived, putting the Houston resident’s best-laid
plans on ice.

  

“We just aren’t sure when they’re going to be able to travel again, be it to Belize or to
Houston,” she said of her and her fiancé’s families. “So we just have everything on hold
right now.”

When the novel coronavirus made landfall in March and civic leaders deployed bans on
large gatherings, wedding plans — and the businesses catering to them — ground toa
halt. May weddings have been lost, but with the slow reopening of business this month
ahead of the June stretch of the wedding season, venues that host the events have been al-
lowed to open at 25 percent capacity.

The shutdowns and crowd suppression measures have dealt a major blow to an industry
that survives on head counts. And the hit came at a time when venues, caterers and florists
typically do the bread-andbutter sales that sustain

them through the slow, hot Houston summers.

Ashton Gardens, a venue with four locations, had to forgo or reschedule 150 events, said
Brad Schreiber, its president. Revenue went to zero for two months, he said.

“You don’t have money coming in,” he said. “You have bills to pay and rent and everything
else.”

Sales have begun to inch up since Gov. Greg Abbott’s May 5 announcement that busi-
nesses, wedding venues among them, could reopen at 25 percent capacity, he said. Still,
Schreiber said he expected smaller crowds would result in a 40 percent to 50 percent de-
crease in sales for the foreseeable future.

The company has two locations in Houston, one in Dallas and one in Atlanta. Among them,
Ashton Gardens typically hosts roughly 800 weddings a year, Schreiber said, offering a
range of services from the chapel to the food, so revenues rise and fall with head counts.
His venue in north Houston can typically accommodate 300-person weddings, he said,
while the one in west Houston can hold as many as 500. At 25 percent capacity, those head

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200526/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Wedding industry jilted as pandemic shrivels sales

counts shrink to 75 and 125, respectively. At $35 a head, the difference between holding an
event for 100 people rather than 300 is significant, especially where fixed costs such as
rent and insurance stay constant no matter how many people attend an event.

Weddings will go on

Jacqueline Hiner, an industry analyst with market research firm IBISWorld, said March
data suggested a 1.9 percent decrease in sales industrywide through the end of this year,
but she expected that to deepen as more data come in. Spending had already been trending
downward before the virus, she said, as brides and grooms increasingly opted for smaller,
more budget-friendly weddings.

Factoring in everything from engagement rings to gift registries, honeymoons and the big
day itself, Americans spend $100 billion a year on getting hitched, according to Jeffra
Trumpower, senior creative director at website WeddingWire.

Venues and vendors can soften the blow with a little imagination,

Trumpower said, pointing to emerging strategies such as multiday weddings and “shift
weddings,” which stagger the guests in shifts as a way to limit the number of people in the
room.

Making the kinds of changes that enable the wedding to go on is the name of the game, she
said.

“T think vendors are really leaning into that right now,” she said.

Schreiber said his team has been working on ways to keep people safe since Abbott said
weddings can go on. His employees are screened for symptoms and given masks, which
they are required to wear. And Schreiber said the venue encourages brides and grooms to
take great care with their guest lists, asking anyone at higher risk or anyone with symp-
toms not to attend. Tables are spaced farther apart, and fewer people can sit at each one.
All told, he said, the events are safer than going to the grocery store.

With weddings on pause, Deborah Rizzo, managing director at the Astorian, a venue
northwest of downtown, said her location has refocused efforts on bookings, designing
new packages built around small and virtual ceremonies. Meantime, she said the venue is
making do with payments that are still coming due for future events.

Gibson, whose wedding is on pause, is still trying to get refunds for some deposits she put
down on her planned July wedding. The couple will lose money spent on “save the date”
mailers and invitations. Her wedding dress from BHLDN sits on the shelf.

“It’s abummer,” she said. “But it’s OK.”

Bracing for dead of summer

At A Fare Extraordinaire, a Houston catering company, the team is planning for smoother
sailing come fall, when wedding season tends to pick up again.

“Our fall brides are hoping for the best,” said Carolyn Bowen, the company’s sales direc-
tor. “And we’re hoping for the best.”

Weddings and events make up about 80 percent of annual sales at Bergner & Johnson De-
sign, a floral shop in the Heights, according to owner Rebekah Johnson, and the business
has dissipated.

“The wedding and events have just completely dried up,” she said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200526/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Wedding industry jilted as pandemic shrivels sales

A Paycheck Protection Program loan provided two months’ worth in payroll relief, but she
said that likely won’t be enough. The months of business she missed out on are some of
the best sales months of the year, she said. They’re what get the shop through the slow,
hot summer.

“T missed out on April and May — you make a big chunk of money, and that gets you
through the dead summer,” she said. “Fall picks back up, and that gets you through Jan-
uary and February. We definitely missed out on the nest egg.”

Unprecedented upswings in sales for Easter and Mother’s Day offered a couple bright
spots, Johnson said, noting Mother’s Day alone was enough to make up for one lost wed-
ding.

“That paid the bills for two weeks,” she said.

To fill the gaps over the next few months, Johnson said she hopes to see another round of
PPP loans. And she hopes there will be small parties in need of some flowers to brighten
the mood.

“It’s a scary time no matter what,” she said. “But I just try to remain positive. I don’t have
any other option at this point.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200526/page/1/textview 3/3
