2020. 6. 17. Esper breaks with Trump over use of military against demonstrators

Esper breaks with Trump over use of military against demon-
strators

Secretary of defense says troops have no role in unrest for now

Houston Chronicle - 4 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Eric Schmitt, Helene Cooper, Thomas Gibbons-Neff and Maggie Haberman

WASHINGTON — Defense Secretary Mark Esper broke with President Donald Trump on
Wednesday and said that active-duty military troops should not be sent to control the
wave of protests in American cities, at least for now. His words were at odds with his com-
mander in chief, who on Monday threatened to do exactly that.

Ht Ns

   

Esper’s comments reflected the turmoil within the military over Trump, who in seeking to
put American troops on the streets alarmed top Pentagon officials fearful that the military
would be seen as participating in a move toward martial law.

Speaking at a news conference at the Pentagon, the defense secretary said that the deploy-
ment of active-duty troops in a domestic law enforcement role “should only be used as a
matter of last resort and only in the most urgent and dire of situations.”

The president was angered by Esper’s remarks and excoriated him later at the White
House, an administration official said. Asked

Wednesday whether Trump still had confidence in Esper, the White House press secretary,
Kayleigh McEnany, said that “as of right now, Secretary Esper is still Secretary Esper,” but
that “should the president lose faith, we will all learn about that in the future.”

Senior Pentagon leaders are now so concerned about losing public support — and that of
their active-duty and reserve personnel, 40 percent of whom are people of color — that
Gen. Mark Milley, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, released a message to top mili-
tary commanders Wednesday affirming that every member of the armed forces swears an
oath to defend the Constitution, which he said “gives Americans the right to freedom of
speech and peaceful assembly.”

Milley did not mention Trump, but he placed a handwritten note at the bottom of the letter
saying, “We all committed our lives to the idea that is America — we will stay true to that
oath and the American people.”

Esper and Milley acted after they came under sharp criticism, including from retired mili-
tary officers, for walking with Trump to a church near the White House after peaceful pro-
testers had been forcibly cleared.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200604/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Esper breaks with Trump over use of military against demonstrators

Former Defense Secretary Jim Mattis, in his harshest criticism of Trump since he resigned
in protest in December 2018 over Trump’s decision to withdraw U.S. troops from eastern
Syria, offered a withering denunciation of the president’s leadership.

“Donald Trump is the first president in my lifetime who does not try to unite the American
people — does not even pretend to try,” Mattis said in a statement. “Instead he tries to di-
vide us. We are witnessing the consequences of three years of this deliberate effort. We are
witnessing the consequences of three years without mature leadership.”

Other former military figures were less focused on Trump than on the specter of the mili-
tary being used to police protesters.

“We are at the most dangerous time for civil-military relations I’ve seen in my lifetime,”
Adm.

Sandy Winnefeld, a retired vice chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said in an email. “It is
especially important to reserve the use of federal forces for only the most dire circum-
stances that actually threaten the survival of the nation. Our senior-most military leaders
need to ensure their political chain of command understands these things.”

Pentagon officials note that the military is trained in using lethal power against foreign
adversaries, not in law enforcement.

On Monday, after major protests over the weekend across the United States, as well as
late-night looting, Trump had discussed invoking the little-used 1807 Insurrection Act to
deploy active-duty troops in American cities. He was dissuaded by Milley and William Barr,
the attorney general, officials said. Officials said Esper initially seemed to back the presi-
dent’s position. Still, on Monday in the Rose Garden, Trump declared himself “your presi-
dent of law and order.”

Whether or not he had ever intended to make good on his threat, about 1,600 troops had
been ordered to hold at bases just outside Washington, with soldiers drawn from a rapid-
reaction unit of the 82nd Airborne Division at Fort Bragg, N.C., and a military police unit at
Fort Drum, N.Y. More than 2,000 National Guard forces are already inside the city.

The Army had made a decision to send a unit of the 82nd Airborne’s rapid deployment
force, about 200 troops, home from the capital region. But Trump ordered Esper during the
angry meeting at the White House to reverse it, the administration official said. The rever-
sal was first reported by the Associated Press.

Despite calls for calm from senior Pentagon leaders, the troops on the ground in Washing-
ton on Wednesday night appeared to be ramping up for a more militarized show of force.
National Guard units pushed solidly ahead of the police near the White House, almost be-
coming the public face of the security presence. They also blocked the streets with Army
transport trucks and extended the perimeter against protesters.

Although Esper’s comments at the Pentagon made clear that a rise in violence in cities na-
tionwide could prompt a change in his stance, his statement was clear. Saying that the In-
surrection Act should be invoked only in the “most urgent and dire of situations,” he
added that “we are not in one of those situations now.”

Esper, a West Point graduate who once served in the 101st Airborne Division, said, “I do not
support invoking the Insurrection Act.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200604/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Esper breaks with Trump over use of military against demonstrators

Esper also backtracked about what he knew beforehand about Trump’s visit to a church
across from the White House.

Esper said this week that he was unaware of his destination when he set out with the presi-
dent on Monday night for what he thought was a visit to view troops near Lafayette Square.
“T didn’t know where I was going,” Esper told NBC News in an interview Tuesday. “I
wanted to see how much damage actually happened.”

White House officials were furious, and Esper tried to walk back his comments Wednesday.
He acknowledged that he did know that he was accompanying Trump to St. John’s Church
for what turned out to be a photo op after the authorities used some form of chemical
spray against protesters to clear the way.

Esper also said it took nearly 24 hours for the authorities to determine that a flight of heli-
copters that descended to rooftop level — kicking up debris and sending peaceful protest-
ers running for cover — belonged to the District of Columbia National Guard. He said that
episode was under investigation.

Esper’s remarks about the delay in finding information on the helicopter mission stand in
stark contrast to the level of military planning that occurred beforehand. An email ob-
tained by the New York Times indicated that Ryan McCarthy, the Army secretary, and Gen.
James McConville, the Army chief of staff, made clear their intent for the evening, includ-
ing the clearance of airspace. The two men, officials said, were on hand in a command cen-
ter in Washington belonging to the FBI, where they pored over maps, looking at streets.
Compounding the problematic use of military helicopters to intimidate protesters was the
fact that one of the aircraft, a Lakota helicopter, was adorned with a red cross, denoting its
medical and therefore not hostile affiliation.

Perhaps the most tortured of the Pentagon top leadership so far has been Milley, who is
seen clearly in a video of the movement across Lafayette Square walking behind Trump
and wearing combat fatigues. Milley, who has since been criticized from a host of voices,
both military and civilian, spent the hours after the photo op walking the streets of Wash-
ington talking to National Guard troops there.

He spoke of the need to protect the peaceful protests, in remarks that appeared jarring to
some because they came in the hours after the president’s photo op.

The comments from Esper and the letter from Milley followed a memo on Monday night
from the Air Force chief of staff, Gen. David Goldfein, deploring as a “national tragedy” the
killing of George Floyd, who died in police custody in Minneapolis. Goldfein said that every
American “should be outraged.”

Since then, other messages to the armed forces have been released by several service chiefs
and secretaries — all carefully drafted and in no way criticizing Trump or his policies, but
expressing solidarity with American values and the military’s history of staying out of pol-
itics.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200604/page/1/textview 3/3
