2020. 6. 17. Rise in infections doesn’t stop loosening of state restrictions

Rise in infections doesn’t stop loosening of state restrictions

Houston Chronicle - 13 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Jeremy Blackman

Two weeks ago, Gov. Greg Abbott visited Amarillo to declare victory over a coronavirus
outbreak that had wreaked havoc on the Panhandle.

Showcasing dwindling caseloads and a stable supply of hospital beds, he said the region’s
success was indicative of a state moving forward amid a containable pandemic.

“Amarillo has turned a corner on its pathway toward a positive, effective resolution of this
particular hot spot,” Abbott remarked, applauding local officials and the “surge” teams of
medical and military staffers that have become a hallmark of his reopening playbook.

But as one problem subsided, others newly emerged. Cases in Texas have since ballooned
to record highs, and hospitals in Houston, San Antonio and other major cities are filling
once more with COVID-19 patients. On Friday, as Abbott allowed restaurants to open at
near-full capacity, the public health nightmare seemed to only be growing.

The governor, though — one of the first to relax his state’s stay-athome order — is push-
ing ahead. “Concerned but not alarmed” was how he and his surrogates put it this week,
even as fellow governors in Oregon and Utah pumped the brakes on their reopenings amid
rising caseloads.

“This was to be expected,” said Abbott, a Republican, in a television interview on Wednes-
day. “Many of these cases we’re seeing have been in the aftermath of the Memorial Day
weekend, and some are the early part of when these protests began.”

For a leader as shrewd and cautious as Abbott, the pandemic has hit an especially treacher-
ous stretch. He was vilified early on by conservatives who saw him sacrificing the economy
for an overblown health scare, and he has been assailed by Democrats for rolling back
restrictions before the state met standards created by his own medical advisers.

“He responded to other voices rather than his own,” said Matt Angle, a longtime Demo-
cratic strategist in Texas. “Now he’s in a position where it does look like he reopened too
quickly.”

The governor’s Republican allies say Abbott has done just enough, meeting the moment
with usual measure and clarity. Whatever the assessment, Abbott is poised to own the out-
come, having barred local leaders from enforcing their own closures or mandating masks
in public. He has made clear in recent days that he’s prepared to stay the course — if that’s
even a choice.

“The government shut the economy down once,” said Matt Mackowiak, a GOP consultant
in Austin. “That feels to me like a bullet you can fire one time.”

As cases rise, the governor has shifted focus away from the health toll. People are hurting,
he acknowledged in Amarillo, but “there are so many more people in the state who are
suffering economically.”

By Friday, deaths neared 2,000 and 2,166 people were hospitalized with COVID-19, anew
high amid a week of them.

“The governor recognizes everything being done to save people is being done,” Mack-
owiak said. “The real thing is managing what you can manage. He can’t really affect

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200613/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Rise in infections doesn’t stop loosening of state restrictions

whether a person can survive or not. But he can manage medical supplies and the re-
sources available to help.”

Dr. John Zerwas, a former Republican state representative and one of the governor’s lead-
ing medical advisers in the reopening, pointed to the “huge mental health impacts” of un-
employment and lockdown measures.

“We’re certainly concerned about trying to keep the curve bent down as much as we can,”
he said. “But at the same time, we know we have to bring the economy back to life.”
Democrats said the approach shows just how little Abbott cares about those outside his po-
litical base, including black and Latino Texans, who have died at much higher rates from
the virus. On Monday, after more than a month of prodding from state Democratic leaders,
Abbott agreed to step up COVID-19 testing in “underserved communities.”

He provided few details, though, and some city officials have said they weren’t informed
about how the effort would work.

Abbott is “really good at saying what he’s going to do and hoping everybody forgets about
it in six months,” Angle said. “And they often do.”

In the meantime, Abbott has dispensed with the weekly press briefings he held early on in
the crisis, opting instead for short, frequent rounds on local televisions stations, where he
has pointed increasingly to Memorial Day and the demonstrations over police brutality as
causes for the latest surge.

While health experts are concerned that the protests likely spread new infections,
Democrats in Houston tried to preempt the governor from using them as an excuse for the
resurgence. In a tweet on Monday, Mayor Sylvester Turner said “cases have been increas-
ing for the last two weeks as well as hospitalizations.”

“This current rise cannot and should not be attributable to the mass protest and demon-
strators,” he said.

John Wittman, a spokesman for Abbott, said responsibility ultimately lies with the public.
“Texans have done a good job so far, but the reality is people need to stay vigilant,” he
said. “Summer is here and everyone wants to go to the pool, but COVID has not left the
state. People need to social distance. They need to wear masks.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200613/page/1/textview 2/2
