2020. 6. 17. One in 5 immigrants at ICE facility in Houston test positive for virus.

One in 5 immigrants at ICE facility in Houston test positive for
virus.

78 of 379 being held in detention had illness at end of May

Houston Chronicle - 4 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Olivia P. Tallet STAFF WRITER

More than 1 in 5 immigrants held at an Immigration and Customs Enforcement detention
center in Houston have tested positive with the new coronavirus as the rate of infection
has nearly tripled there, raising concerns from health experts.

Saige,

  

As of the end of May, 78 of the 379 immigrants held at the Houston Contract Detention Fa-
cility had tested postive for COVID-19, according to statistics provided by the federal
agency. The previous week, 21 immigrants were reported to have been infected.

To Amanda M. Simanek, an epidemiology professor at the University of Wisconsin-Mil-
waukee’s School of Public Health, the infection rate was concerning but not surprising.
“In any congregate, indoor setting in which there is overcrowding, maintaining levels of
social distancing necessary to prevent spread of infection is a huge challenge, which makes
detention centers prime locations for outbreaks,” Simanek said.

The facility has the highest infection rate among three ICE dedicated detention centers in
the Greater Houston Area. It is also the only one administered by CoreCivic, a private con-
tractor that manages detention and correctional facilities for government agencies.

The Joe Corley Detention Center in Conroe follows with an infection rate of 14.7 percent
among immigrant detainees, or about 1 in every 7 people. The number of confirmed cases
grew from 29 to 43 during the last week of May.

The other ICE facility, the Montgomery Processing Center, has an infection rate of 4.4 per-
cent. However, its COVID-19 cases more than doubled in the same period, from eight to 21.
The private firm GEO Group manages that site and Corley.

ICE officials said the agency has intensified its testing capability in the three Houston fa-
cilities, resulting in a corresponding rise in the number of cases.

The agency said more than 400 ICE detainees had been tested in the three detention facili-
ties combined. They said they are now also examining detainees who are asymptomatic,
adding that nearly two-thirds of those tested positive were at the time.

With over 440 positive COVID-19 cases in detention centers across Texas, the state leads
the country in the number of infections among ICE detainees, almost equal to Louisiana,
with 294 confirmed cases, and California with 160, combined.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200604/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. One in 5 immigrants at ICE facility in Houston test positive for virus.

ICE has tested 2,781 detainees under its custody across the country as of Tuesday morning,
and half of them, or 1,406, were COVID-19 positive. In the after

noon, they reported having fewer cases under their custody, 813, and 3,092 tested. The
discrepancy could be due to a change in reporting method as ICE is now separating cases
by “total confirmed” and “currently under isolation or monitoring.”

There are also 44 confirmed cases among employees of ICE detention centers nationwide.
One health expert told congressional leaders this week that an anticipated spread of
COVID-19 through detention facilities could eventually overwhelm nearby healthcare
providers and expand the virus in communities.

“Now the flames are growing,” Dr. Scott Allen testified Tuesday at a Senate Judiciary Com-
mittee hearing about practices of ICE detentions and prisons during the pandemic. He said
he warned Congress in a March letter of a “tinderbox scenario.”

Recent data from the COVID Prison Project shows that prison populations test substan-
tially higher than the general population in many states, said Allen, who works for the Of-
fice of Civil Rights and Civil Liberties in the Department of Homeland Security, to which
ICE belongs. However, he testified as an individual supported by the whistleblower advo-
cacy group Government Accountability Project.

Based in his two decades of experience in correctional health, Allen warned that the ex-
pansion of COVID-19 inside detention centers represents not only a risk for detainees but
also for the surrounding communities.

He compared detention centers to “bus terminals with people coming and going.” New
immigrants arrive regularly and are often transferred from facilities escorted by staff. De-
tainees are also released at courts and dropped at bus stations and airports without warn-
ing, he said. “Officers and staff come and go, three shifts a day. And the virus can easily
move back and forth by means of the asymptomatic ‘silent spreaders’ who carry the virus
but do not have symptoms.”

His lawyer Dana Gold, with the Accountability Project, said Allen cannot comment directly
on the conditions at the three facilities in Houston.

Simanek, the epidemiology professor, said that the high proportion of asymptomatic im-
migrants who tested positive in the three Houston detention centers are precisely the
silent spreaders.

“This is even more testimony to why the inability to properly social distance in such set-
tings is problematic,” she said.

Meanwhile, immigrant detainees have been trying to reach out to the public with letters,
messages and videos posted on social media about their fears of contamination in unsani-
tary confinement conditions.

“There are many people sick inside (ICE detentions), but they don’t want to tell,” said an
immigrant from Honduras who was at the Houston Correctional and Montgomery facility
this year and released two weeks ago. She doesn’t want to be identified for fear of retalia-
tion since she is still hoping to advance her case in court.

Advocacy organizations such as the Houston Legal Collaborative and Freedom for Immi-
grants said they are receiving numerous calls from detained immigrants complaining
about and lack of hygiene and protection and from the virus.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200604/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. One in 5 immigrants at ICE facility in Houston test positive for virus.

ICE officers insist that they are taking measures recommended by the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention and noted that they had released about 900 detainees nationwide
with serious risk of infection due to underlying health conditions.

Democratic lawmakers have questioned ICE’s handling of the pandemic at detention facil-
ities. A recent inspection by under the Department of Homeland Security found several de-
ficiencies. At the Corley facility, for example, units of both women and men with a capacity
of 10 or more detainees have only one toilet.

The DHS Office of Inspector General said last month that the agency is opening an investi-
gation.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200604/page/1/textview 3/3
