2020. 6. 17. Twitter flags Trump's tweet for ‘glorifying violence.’

Twitter flags Trump’s tweet for ‘glorifying violence.’

Houston Chronicle - 30 May 2020 - A1 - By Tony Romm and Allyson Chiu This report contains material from the New York
Times.

WASHINGTON — President Donald Trump took to Twitter early Friday to condemn Min-
neapolis demonstrators as “THUGS,” threaten military intervention and predict local
looting could lead to “shooting,” prompting the social media company to take the un-
precedented step of limiting the public’s ability to view and share his tweet.

The label Twitter appended — which the company also added later to a tweet from the
White House — marks the second time in a week the tech giant has taken action in re-
sponse to Trump’s controversial remarks. Trump and his allies again decried the move as
censorship, promising to regulate the company a day after he signed an executive order
that could open the door for the U.S. government to punish social media sites for their
handling of political speech online.

Trump fired off his early morning comment as protests over the death of George Floyd in-
tensified in Minneapolis. Fires raged across the city Thursday night as demonstrators took
to the streets because Floyd, who was black, died in police custody. The unrest has rever-
berated nationwide.

“These THUGS are dishonoring the memory of George Floyd, and I won’t let that happen,”
Trump tweeted shortly before 1 a.m. Friday, adding, “Any difficulty and we will assume
control but, when the looting starts, the shooting starts.”

Critics immediately condemned Trump’s tweet, asserting that he was promoting violent
retaliation against protesters, and Twitter took swift action. “This Tweet violated the
Twitter Rules about glorifying violence,” read a gray box that now hides Trump’s tweet
from public view unless a user clicks to see it. In doing so, Twitter also prevented other
users from liking the president’s tweet or sharing it without appending comment.

““We’ve taken action in the interest of preventing others from being inspired to commit vi-
olent acts, but have kept the tweet on Twitter because it is important that the public still be
able to see the tweet given its relevance to ongoing matters of public importance,” said
Trenton Kennedy, a spokesman for the company.

In an act of defiance, the White House hours later reposted a quotation of the president’s
controversial comment about shootings on its account. That, too, received a label from
Twitter indicating it broke company rules around glorifying violence.

A White House spokesman did not respond to a request for comment.

The dispute immediately exacerbated tensions between the Silicon Valley company and
Trump, who tweeted later Friday morning that he had been unfairly targeted.

Trump’s late-night tweet about Minneapolis, which was paired with another blistering
post targeting Minnesota Mayor Jacob Frey, a Democrat, came after protesters in the city
breached a police precinct that had been evacuated and set fire to the building. The chaotic
scenes marked the latest escalation of the widespread unrest that has plagued Minneapolis
for three straight days following a fatal incident in which Floyd, an unarmed black man,
died after a white police officer knelt on his neck for minutes as he was handcuffed on the
ground.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200530/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Twitter flags Trump's tweet for ‘glorifying violence.’

On Thursday, amid reports of fires, looting and vandalism that had begun the night before,
Frey declared an emergency, which was soon followed by Democratic Gov. Tim Walz’s or-
der to call in the National Guard. By nightfall, more than 500 soldiers had been deployed to
Minneapolis, St. Paul and surrounding communities, the Guard confirmed.

“T can’t stand back & watch this happen to a great American City, Minneapolis,” Trump
tweeted early Friday, before taking aim at Frey.

“A total lack of leadership,” the president continued. “Either the very weak Radical Left
Mayor, Jacob Frey, get his act together and bring the City under control, or I will send in
the National Guard & get the job done right.”

Then, Trump called the demonstrators, many of whom are people of color, “THUGS” be-
fore parroting the words of former Miami police chief Walter Headley.

In saying “when the looting starts, the shooting starts” Trump echoed a phrase coined by
the police chief in the 1960s about crackdowns on black neighborhoods during times of
unrest. Headley warned that young black men whom he called “hoodlums” had “taken ad-
vantage of the civil rights campaign,” and added, “We don’t mind being accused of police
brutality.”

Trump said he had not been urging further violence but rather describing it as a natural
consequence of looting.

“T don’t want this to happen, and that’s what the expression put out last night means,”
Trump said of the earlier tweet.

By late Friday afternoon, Trump was noting that he had spoken to Floyd’s family — “They
were grieving,” he said — and condemning the actions of Officer Derek Chauvin, who’s
charged in Floyd’s killing. “It certainly looked like there was no excuse for it,” he said,
calling it a “terrible insult to police and to policemen.”

Trump said he had not known the origins of the statement he used about “looting” and
“shooting” but that he had heard it for a long time and that he intended it to be about the
protesters’ actions.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200530/page/1/textview 2/2
