2020. 6. 17. Texas congressmen call on FDA to investigate contract.

Texas congressmen call on FDA to investigate contract.

S.A. firm scrutinized after landing $39M award for food relief

Houston Chronicle - 27 May 2020 - A1 - By Tom Orsborn STAFF WRITER

SAN ANTONIO — Two members of San Antonio’s congressional delegation called on the
U.S. Department of Agriculture to investigate multi-million dollar contracts for food relief
granted to companies with no experience in food distribution, including a San Antonio
event planner.

    

U.S. Rep. Lloyd Doggett, D-Austin, said Tuesday the $39 million contract awarded to
CRE8AD8, owned by event planner Gregorio Palomino, should be canceled.

“TI am contacting the Agriculture Department and asking them to issue a stop-work notice
... and then to proceed to void the contract,” said Doggett, who represents most of the
eastern half of San Antonio from U.S. 281 to Loop 410.

U.S. Rep. Joaquin Castro, D-San Antonio, sent a letter to Agriculture Secretary Sonny Per-
due asking for an investigation into how the contracts were awarded for the Farmers to
Families Food Box Program, designed to get surplus food into the hands of families in need
because of the economic havoc caused by the novel coronavirus pandemic.

The two congressmen acted after a San Antonio Express-News investigation, published
Sunday, documented how Palomino touted professional credentials he does not possess
and boasted of major corporate clients who say they have never done business with him.
USDA officials didn’t comment about CRE8AD8 specifically, but said all proposals had to
“demonstrate that product could be purchased, moved to a distribution center and deliv-
ered while adhering (to) the USDA high food safety protocols.”

“A robust audit program will also be a part of the program to ensure quality of product and
execution of the proposal as submitted to USDA,” a spokesperson said.

Palomino did not respond to requests for comment.

“As best as I can determine, the Agriculture Department awarded 198 contracts in a single
week,” Doggett said. “For them to award almost 200 contracts in a week, it’s clear they did
not do proper vetting.”

The contract awarded to Palomino requires his company to buy 18 million pounds of fruits,
vegetables, dairy and meat, pack it into 750,000 individual boxes and transport the boxes
to food banks and other nonprofits in seven states from Louisiana to Utah by June 30.

The program’s distribution period began May 15, but the San Antonio Food Bank and other
nonprofits have yet to receive a single box of food from CRE8AD8.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200527/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Texas congressmen call on FDA to investigate contract.

Palomino was selected for the contract over established food distributors even though he
lacked both experience and a Perishable Agricultural Commodities Act license, a require-
ment for operating a produce business.

Experience a major issue

The USDA granted Palomino a PACA license last week, but industry experts said the license
doesn’t ease concerns about his inexperience.

Castro agreed.

“The contract award is very suspicious because of the lack of qualifications of the vendor.
.. This contract doesn’t look right at all,” Castro said.

In his letter to Perdue, Castro said his “constituents require an explanation” as to why the
USDA contracted “with entities without a proven history or track record ... over applicants
with years of experience in the industry.”

Doggett had a similar dim view of some of the USDA’s vendor choices.

“Everything about this particular contractor in San Antonio, where we made national news
because of the demand on the Food Bank, is so very wrong,” Doggett said.

He said it appeared the USDA rushed the awarding of the contracts “to provide a photo op
for Ivanka Trump.” The president’s daughter attended an event celebrating the program.
“The problems that it creates for food banks that are overwhelmed and producers that, in
some cases, are overwhelmed with produce that they are destroying is so wrong,” Doggett
said. “I just wish we had a slight amount of competence, but we don’t.”

The USDA rejected bids submitted by several longtime San Antonio wholesalers, including
River City Produce and Big State Produce.

“At a time when millions of Americans are struggling to put food on the table, USDA is
wrong to bet the success of vital food safety net programs on neophyte food distribution
companies,” Castro said in his letter. “Food banks, nonprofits, and needy families should
not have to hope and wait to see if a distributor can deliver as promised.”

Dubious claims

As the Express-News reported Sunday, Palomino has listed Valero Energy, USAA and Fi-
esta San Antonio as clients, but none of those entities could find any record of having con-
tracted with him or CRE8AD8. Their names have since been removed from the company’s
website.

Palomino also said he was on the board of the San Antonio Hispanic Chamber of Commerce
from 201011. A chamber spokesman said there is no record of his having ever served on the
board, and the chamber’s annual federal tax filings have never listed him among the orga-
nization’s board members.

On Palomino’s LinkedIn page, the designation for CMP (Certified Meeting Professional)
appeared after his name until the ExpressNews began inquiring about it. The credential is
awarded by the Events Industry Council in Washington and is regarded as a “badge of ex-
cellence” in the events industry.

An industry council spokesman said Palomino “has never been a CMP.” The designation
has been removed.

While San Antonio Democrats are putting pressure on the USDA to investigate, even can-
cel, Palomino’s contract, Palomino touted the support of a former Republican congress-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200527/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Texas congressmen call on FDA to investigate contract.

man.
Photos of Palomino with Henry Bonilla, who served in Congress from 1993-2007, were
posted on Cre8ameal, a Facebook page devoted to CRE8AD8’s food box venture. The pho-
tos, which appear to have been taken at Los Patios, a catering and event space in north San
Antonio, are accompanied by a post that thanks the former legislator “for stopping by and
showing support from Washington DC!”

Efforts to reach Bonilla were unsuccessful.

Address raises eyebrows

In applying for a PACA license, Palomino listed the address of Los Patios as his business
address, records show.

USDA regulations require a PACA applicant to list his or her business address. But
CRE8AD8’s address is a mailbox at a UPS store in a North Side shopping center, and the
USDA won’t accept a P.O. Box.

Los Patios owner John McClung said he wasn’t aware that Palomino had used Los Patios’
address.

Iverson Brownell, the San Antonio chef who Palomino said is his partner on the food box
project, has been working out of Los Patios for the last “six to nine months” catering for
Los Patios and other clients, McClung said.

“T have no business relationship with Mr. Palomino or whatever this venture is that he and
Mr. Brownell are involved in,” McClung said. “I’m not impugning or endorsing it. I’m just
giving you the facts.”

McClung added he saw nothing “deleterious” in Palomino and Brownell operating out of
Los Patios and called the Farmers to Families Food Box program a “good use of govern-
ment dollars.”

The CEO of Feeding Texas, a coalition of 21 food banks across the state, said uncertainty
about CRE8AD8 is causing anxiety among food bank directors counting on the company to
provide food for needy people.

“Feeding Texas is working with them to make it work, but if USDA is going to pull the con-
tract, we need to know about it sooner rather than later,” Celia Cole said.

CRE8AD8’s contract isn’t the only one that raised eyebrows. A $40 million deal went to
California Avocados Direct, which has no more than $2 million in annual work; $12.2 mil-
lion to Travel Well Holdings LLC, which sells organic hand sanitizers, CBD products, goat
milk body cream and other products online; and $16.6 million to Yegg Inc., a California
firm that offers “business finance solutions.”

The USDA has since terminated its contract with California Avocados Direct.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200527/page/1/textview 3/3
