2020. 6. 17. » Civil rights leaders urge energy firms to diversify.

» Civil rights leaders urge energy firms to diversify.

Houston Chronicle - 9 Jun 2020 - A1 - By James Osborne STAFF WRITER

WASHINGTON — African American civil rights leaders are urging the oil and gas industry
to diversify its workforce amid national protests over the death of Houston-born George
Floyd during an arrest by Minneapolis police.

a r , re

‘a, yr x By

  
    
      

Rev. Jesse Jackson and Marc Morial, president of the National Urban League, have written
letters to the trade group Interstate Natural Gas Association of America asking for a meet-
ing to discuss the hiring of more women and minorities.

“We believe that through the development of a workforce that reflects the country’s de-
mographics, upward mobility will take place in underserved, urban, rural, middle class and
other communities,” Morial wrote in a letter last month to Alex Oehler, the interim presi-
dent of INGAA.

Last year, black people represented just 7 percent of the oil and gas industry’s workforce,
compared with 12 percent across all U.S. industries, according to the Department of Labor.
wom

en made up 22 percent of the industry, while representing 47 percent of the overall U.S.
workforce. Latinos and Asians were also underrepresented, data shows.

The letters were first reported by news site Axios on Monday. Oehler told the Washington
news outlet that “he plans to respond soon to Morial and welcomes the conversation about
diversity.”

In recent years, oil and gas companies have tried to recruit more minorities, work with in-
stitutions such as historically black colleges, said a spokesman for the American Petroleum
Institute, the industry’s largest trade group.

“We are committed to achieving greater diversity within the industry,” the spokesman
said. “As an industry that supports millions of American jobs, we’re determined to build a
diverse workforce of the future and prepare the next generation of leaders with the skills
needed to succeed.”

The industry has had some success, doubling the percentage of African American employ-
ees from 3.5 percent in 2015. But with so few black leaders in the upper ranks of oil and gas
companies, there is a long way to go, said Paula Glover, president of the American Associa-
tion of Blacks in Energy.

“This is not just about hiring more people,” she said. “It’s about doing business with
African American-owned companies and making sure African Americans in your organi-
zation have a path to leadership.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200609/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. » Civil rights leaders urge energy firms to diversify.

In his letter, Morial also asks the Interstate Natural Gas Association of America to help in

securing “equal access” to natural gas and other forms of energy for minority communi-
ties in the United States.

Jackson has worked to get a 30mile gas pipeline built for a small rural town in southern
Illinois, where residents reportedly still rely on wood-burning stoves for heat in the win-
tertime.

“There are pockets of poverty all over the country,” Jackson told NBC 5 Chicago. “My job is
to lift up those whose backs are against the wall.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200609/page/1/textview 2/2
