2020. 6. 17. Black community's pain ‘spilling out onto streets’

Black community’s pain ‘spilling out onto streets’
Protest escalates into clashes, blocking of roadways

Houston Chronicle - 30 May 2020 - A1 - By Dylan McGuinness and Jay R. Jordan STAFF WRITERS

Frustration and anger over the death of Third Ward native George Floyd boiled over Friday
night in downtown Houston, as hundreds of protesters blocked roads and hurled objects,
injuring police officers and damaging patrol cars. Police, in turn, dispelled tear gas and

made several arrests as the protest stretched into the night.
ee ar - "i :

ay

Ay

    
  

  

Around 9 p.m., the city sent an emergency notification that it had closed “all highway and
street access into and out of downtown.”

“Those outside of downtown are being asked to avoid traveling

near the area through the night,” the alert said.

Officers in SWAT gear used tear gas to dispel a crowd near Capitol and Caroline streets,
near where protesters overtook a police cruiser hours earlier, smashing its windshield and
windows. Police radio traffic reported looting in the Verizon store on Main Street.

Joe Gamaldi, president of the Houston Police Officers’ Association, said some officers were
hospitalized after being attacked, though it wasn’t immediately clear how many or how
seriously they were hurt.

“Our officers who were attacked are in the hospital, patrol cars ruined, businesses dam-
aged, this is not who we are as a city and as acommunity,” he said. “We will protect your
right to protest, but we will not allow our city to decay into chaos.”

The uproar prompted Mayor Sylvester Turner to implore residents to act respectfully. He
said most of the protesters “demonstrated their views and their pain” in such a manner.
“This is our city. This is our home. Let’s not harm one another,” he said as the situation
escalated Friday night. “I want protesters to go home safely to their families and I want
police officers to go home safely to theirs. There is a lot of pain throughout our country.”
“So protest? I got it. Demonstrate? March? I got it, you have that right. I only ask that you
do it peacefully,” he said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200530/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Black community's pain ‘spilling out onto streets’

Addressing news media around 6 p.m., Turner said he wasn’t aware of any injuries at that
time, and he said then that the number of arrests was few, though that was before the situ-
ation deteriorated. Some were detained for blocking roads, and others were at scenes
where a police cruiser was destroyed. But as the night progressed, rocks and bottles were
thrown at officers, skateboards were used to bash patrol car windows, and glass in down-
town buildings was shattered. The extent of the damage was unclear.

“We are not going to allow looters and people who are intent on causing turmoil in our
City. It is one thing to protest against the wrong/the death of #GeorgeFloyd. I join you. But
some people are intentionally trying to incite confrontation/violence,” Turner said. “That
hurts all of us.”

The demonstrations, which remained peaceful for several hours in the afternoon, began
with a march organized by Black Lives Matter around 2 p.m. from Discovery Green to City
Hall. The throng of protesters, escorted by police down Walker Street, joined national out-
rage about Floyd’s death with chants of “I can’t breathe” and “No justice, no peace.”
Floyd, 46, a Yates High School graduate, died in Minneapolis police custody Monday night
after video showed an officer kneeling on his neck, pinning him to the ground while he
pleaded for help. Just before the Houston rally began, officials in Minnesota arrested the
officer, Derek Chauvin, and charged him with murder and manslaughter, according to the
Minneapolis Star-Tribune. Chauvin and three other officers at the scene were fired earlier
this week.

Ashton Woods, Black Lives Matter Houston founder, said the rally here was to ensure that
“people know that they have a place to come and express their anger and frustration.”
While most of the early demonstration was peaceful, that anger and frustration was evi-
dent.

At one point, a white man with a facial covering, carrying a rifle, was escorted by police
from the park outside City Hall. It wasn’t clear if he was ultimately arrested. Turner said he
didn’t have an update on that man.

The crowd dispersed from City Hall around 4 p.m., and an organizer told them to leave
peacefully, just as they had come in.

“Your voices have been heard, but your assignment starts today,” she said, encouraging
them to develop strategies for change.

The demonstrations grew more disruptive from there, however, leading to several stand-
offs and clashes with police. On the other side of City Hall, one group had moved to the in-
tersection of Walker and Bagby streets, climbing on construction equipment and blocking
limited traffic.

Around 5 p.m., a group of protesters blocked off the Memorial

Parkway feeder road near Houston Avenue. That led to a confrontation with mounted po-
lice in which at least three people were taken into custody.

One of them was pinned to the ground, though it appeared officers stayed clear of his neck
and head. Some of the protesters threw items at officers in that altercation, though it
wasn’t immediately clear what charges — if any — the people taken into custody would
face.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200530/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Black community's pain ‘spilling out onto streets’

Later, near Capitol and La Branch, protesters overtook the cruiser. Protesters spilled on to
an Interstate 45 ramp and, later, onto U.S. 59. Hordes of police on horses, foot and in cars
worked to close roads and secure the areas.

Many of the protesters expressed outrage about recent police shootings here in Houston.
There have been a string of at least seven such shootings since April, and Chief Art Acevedo
has asked the FBI to review one case of a man who appeared to be on his knees at the time
he was shot.

But Acevedo and Turner have both said the officers in the other cases acted justifiably.
They urged residents to review them individually.

‘What happens sometimes is everything becomes conflated, and viewed through the lens
of things that are happening all over the country,” Turner said.

Acevedo addressed an angry crowd Friday afternoon, telling them “black lives matter” to
his force and yelling into a megaphone: “We stand with the Floyd family.” He emphasized
that he had appeared on MSNBC, calling for charges to be filed against the officer in the
Floyd case. Some in the crowd said they respected him for addressing the protesters, but
others shouted that his remarks weren’t satisfactory.

“T’m happy that they are here today. People need to be heard,” Acevedo said later. “I'd let
them know: Don’t let anyone hijack your movement. Because once you start burning a city,
nobody’s talking about George Floyd.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200530/page/1/textview 3/3
