2020. 6. 17. Trio of crises roiling black communities

Trio of crises roiling black communities

Houston Chronicle - 8 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Sheryl Gay Stolberg

WASHINGTON — When Mike Griffin, a black community organizer in Minneapolis, took to
the streets in protest, he was grieving for two black men taken during the turmoil convuls-
ing the country: George Floyd, who died after gasping for air under the knee of a white po-
lice officer, and his own godfather, who succumbed to COVID-19.

 

“T’m just as likely to die from a cop as I am from COVID,” he said.

In Providence, R.I., graduate students and alumni of color at the Brown University School
of Public Health are demanding their professors take a strong stand against police violence
— and direct research dollars to study it. And in Baltimore, a city still reckoning with the
2015 death of Freddie Gray in police custody, Rajikh Hayes, an activist, said protesters were
acutely aware that they were risking exposure to the coronavirus, which is far likelier to
kill black people than white people, and of the suffering COVID-19

had caused in their community.

“It’s really a simple question: ‘Am I going to let a disease kill me, or am I going to let the
system — the police?” he said. “And if something is going to take me out when I don’t
have a job, which one do I prefer? Folks who don’t have much else to lose — they under-
stand that this system isn’t built for black people. And that’s why people are in the
streets.”

As protests over police brutality continue to roil cities, this is an extraordinary moment of
pain for the nation, especially for black Americans who are bearing the brunt of three
crises — police violence, crushing unemployment and the deadliest infectious disease
threat in a century — that have laid bare long-standing injustice. Public health experts,
activists and lawmakers say the triple threat requires a coordinated response.

“These are interrelated crises — the crisis of racism and inequality that is now converging
with the crisis of COVID-19,” said Dr. Leana Wen, who was Baltimore’s health commis-
sioner when Gray died and who testified before Congress on Thursday about racial dispari-
ties in the pandemic. “There is no playbook for what you do for addressing public health
impacts of civil unrest.”

Devastating job losses

The precise toll that the coronavirus has taken on people of color remains unknown; not
every state collects demographic data. The Trump administration, under pressure from
Congress, announced Thursday new requirements for states to do so. But an analysis of

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200608/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. Trio of crises roiling black communities

data from 40 states and the District of Columbia, released last month by the nonpartisan
APM Research Lab, found black Americans are more than twice as likely as whites, Latinos
or Asian Americans to die from the coronavirus. In some states, the disparity is much
greater.

Devastating job losses are also “hitting black workers and their families especially hard,”
according to a recent report by the Economic Policy Institute, a liberal think tank. The un-
employment rate for black Americans is 16.8 percent, compared with 12.4 percent for white
Americans, according to federal data released Friday. And while the economy is showing
hints of recovery, African Americans are being left out; the black unemployment rate rose
slightly in May despite a decline of nearly 2 points for white workers.

On Capitol Hill, lawmakers are trying to respond. Rep. Barbara Lee, D-Calif., introduced
legislation last week calling for the creation of a “truth, racial healing and transformation
commission” to examine the legacy of slavery and systemic racism. Black Americans, she
said, are suffering “a pandemic within a pandemic.”

Floyd is a case in point. He died with coronavirus antibodies in his blood, surviving infec-
tion only to die in police custody. With so many people protesting Floyd’s death, many of
them black and brown, state and local health officials are bracing for a fresh wave of coro-
navirus infections.

The mass incarceration of black people has only worsened the pandemic’s heavy toll on
minorities. Black Americans are incarcerated in state prisons at five times the rate of
whites, according to the Sentencing Project, a Washington advocacy group. Prisons are
breeding grounds for the coronavirus, and jails pose a particular threat because people cy-
cle in and out, spreading disease in their neighborhoods.

“The actual incarceration, housing of people, is only part of it,” said Nickolas Zaller, a
public health professor at the University of Arkansas who studies the relationship between
health and the criminal justice system. “When people are released, what job opportunities
do they have? What is their housing situation? All of these other factors relate back to the
current pandemic.”

Trevor Noah, the South Africanborn host of “The Daily Show,” connected the dots from
Amy Cooper, a white woman who falsely accused an African American bird watcher of
threatening her, to the death of Floyd. All are playing out “against the backdrop,” he said,
of a public health crisis that has left Americans of all races frustrated, uncertain and stuck
inside.

“While everyone is facing the battle against coronavirus, black people in America are still
facing the battle against racism and coronavirus,” he said in a recent 18-minute mono-
logue, adding, “Coronavirus exposed all of it.”

For many involved in the protests, the pandemic is deeply personal. Some have lost friends
or family members to the virus. Others have lost jobs or are front-line workers — in gro-
cery stores, hospitals, mass transit systems — putting themselves at risk of infection.
“We've had a lot of volunteers come out and just tell us how they’re unable to work right
now, and they just can’t sit home and do nothing,” said Jacqueline LaBayne, 23, of Free-
dom Fighters D.C., which led hundreds in a march to the Capitol in recent days. “Even local
businesses, they can’t take customers, and they are donating meals. It’s honestly incredi-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200608/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. Trio of crises roiling black communities

ble, the support we’ve gotten in these circumstances, because so many people are affected
by COVID.”

A grim reminder

In New York, Rashid Shabazz, chief marketing officer of the online organization Color of
Change, displayed symptoms of the coronavirus for several weeks, he said, but was unable
to get tested. He said the respiratory illness reminded him of the dying words — “I can’t
breathe” — of Floyd and another victim of police violence, Eric Garner, who was put in an
illegal chokehold.

Shabazz wrote about it in a column for The Root, a black news and opinion site, under the
headline “We Can’t Breathe: COVID-19 and Police Injustice Are Suffocating Black People.”
At the Brown University School of Public Health, about 20 students and recent graduates in
the department of behavioral and social sciences wrote the predominantly white faculty a
letter demanding a “response to police brutality and anti-blackness,” citing the coron-
avirus and the recent killings of three African Americans: Breonna Taylor, killed by police
in Louisville, Ky.; Anmaud Arbery, shot in south Georgia after being pursued by armed
white residents; and Floyd.

The letter has prompted painful conversations, both students and professors say. Don
Operario, a professor, said he convened a meeting of those who wanted to “transform this
inner reflection to actual words and action.” School administrators followed up with a
statement pledging to “tackle these inequities.”

The students want more than talk. Arjee Restar, who just received her doctorate, said the
group wanted to break “silence and a lack of investment in antiblack police brutality
work.” Ashley Gomez, a doctoral student, said professors who were quick to “adapt their
research” to study the coronavirus needed to apply for grants to study racism as well.

At Thursday’s virtual hearing before Congress, witnesses told

lawmakers that some of the same forces — distrust of institutions — at work in the pan-
demic were also fueling the protests against police violence. Dr. Uché Blackstock, a doctor
in New York whose company, Advancing Health Equity, works to address racial disparities
in health, said many of her black patients who had the coronavirus did not get tested out of
either a reluctance to see a doctor or a lack of available testing.

One patient, seeing the protective gear that covered Blackstock’s skin, asked if she was
black, she said, because he wanted to make sure his concerns would be taken seriously. She
said she worried that COVID-19 would become a disease of marginalized communities, just
as AIDS was in the late 1990s, when white Americans had access to new medicines and
health care while many black Americans, with fewer economic resources, did not.

“T’m worried about black communities and other communities of color being stigmatized,
as those are the people with coronavirus,” she said, adding, “We need to equitably allocate
resources to black communities as quickly as possible.”

Rep. James Clyburn of South Carolina, the No. 3 House Democrat, who oversees the select
committee examining the federal response to the pandemic, said he intended to make sure
that the trillions of dollars Congress appropriated for coronavirus relief was spent “effi-
ciently, effectively, equitably — and I’m particularly interested in the equitable part of it.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200608/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. Trio of crises roiling black communities

But he also said he intended to “nudge my caucus” to pass legislation banning the police
tactics used to detain Floyd.

After the Baltimore unrest in 2015, Wen, now a public health professor at George Washing-
ton University, declared racism a public health issue.

More people are thinking that way now. In North Carolina, where African Americans ac-
count for 28 percent of coronavirus cases but only 22 percent of the population, the state
health secretary decried “structural racism” last week. In Ohio, where black people ac-
count for 18 percent of COVID-19 deaths but 13 percent of the population, officials in
Franklin County have declared racism a public health crisis.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200608/page/1/textview 4/4
