2020. 6. 17. A diverse, massive crowd turns out to rally peacefully for change, justice for one of their own

A diverse, massive crowd turns out to rally peacefully for
change, justice for one of their own

Houston Chronicle - 3 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Emily Foxhall, St. John Barned-Smith, Nicole Hensley, Jasper Scherer and Dylan
McGuinness STAFF WRITERS

The sound of George Floyd’s name reverberated around the downtown streets of the city
where he grew up, where tens of thousands of people rallied demanding justice, demand-
ing accountability, demanding change.

   
 

“Say his name!” “George Floyd!” People of all backgrounds had gathered for the Tuesday
rally at Discovery Green organized by Black Lives Matter and rapper Trae Tha Truth. In the
beating-down heat, they followed a procession of Floyd’s family and Houston public offi-
cials to a gathering in front of City Hall.

Tensions would later flare as police worked to get protesters to leave the area after dark,
but, to begin, protesters and police took a knee, a gesture that has become a powerful sym-
bol in the Black Lives Matter movement. It also brought back imagery of how Floyd died.

It had been eight days since a video showed a Min

neapolis police officer kneeling on Floyd’s neck, as Floyd repeatedly pleaded for air. His
death inspired protests in cities around the world, including Houston, where residents now
came together yet again to make their voices heard.

They arrived on horseback and on foot from all reaches of the sprawling city, forming one
of the biggest protest crowds here in recent memory; organizers estimated attendance at
60,000. With political support, and leadership from those who knew Floyd, people in his
diverse hometown were standing up for one of their own.

“We know the world’s watching right now,” Trae tha Truth (whose given name is Frazier
Thompson III) told the crowd. “George sparked the change in the world that we need right
now.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200603/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. A diverse, massive crowd turns out to rally peacefully for change, justice for one of their own

Floyd, 46, grew up several miles from City Hall in Third Ward. He graduated from Yates
High School in 1993, where friends remembered him as a “gentle giant” — a laid-back
man in a 6foot-6-inch frame.

“Big Floyd,” friends called him. The passionate protest in his honor was a protest with
Houston flair. The list of speakers included prominent local politicians, such as Mayor
Sylvester Turner and two longtime African American Congress members, Reps. Sheila
Jackson Lee and Al Green.

Ninety-one-year-old Rev. Bill Lawson, who founded Third Ward’s Wheeler Avenue Baptist
Church, was there in his wheelchair.

Others revved the engines of their motorcycles so the sound echoed between the sky-
scrapers as “I’m so Houston” played from speakers.

They were representing the Bayou City, spreading a universal message. “END POLICE
BRUTALITY,” a sign read. “JUSTICE 4 GEORGE,” said another.

One girl, maybe 5, hoisted a sign that was almost the size of her body: “I matter.”

“Today it’s about lifting up the family of George Floyd,” Turner said. “It’s about support-
ing 16 members of his family who have taken the time ... walked through the streets just
like you did, to be here with you today.”

Added Turner: “We want them to know George did not die in vain.”

Earlier in the afternoon, city employees removed piles of bricks and rocks where they
found them. Photos of violence of prior protests across the country — burned out police
cars, people shot with rubber bullets, broken glass of looted stores — weren’t far from
mind.

When everyone took a knee at Discovery Green, the crowd hushed.

A group of black trail riders helped lead the way. At least one wore a T-shirt that read:
“Black Cowboys Matter.”

Soon, the slow, impassioned march to City Hall began. The marchers passed Houston po-
lice officers at the intersections. Some posed for photos, while others stood stoic.

Later in the evening, about 20 protesters would silently take a knee in front of those offi-
cers. A protester would thank them for letting them peacefully gather. The officers would
nod back.

Crystal Lewis stood against a wall on Walker Street, watching awestruck as the chanting
crowd passed. She was crying. She hadn’t known the march was going to happen.

“This is so beautiful,” Lewis said. “I have never seen so many people get together like
this.”

The crowd extended so far from City Hall that it was hard to hear as Reps. Jackson Lee and
Green pushed for change. “TI will not lie,” Green said. “I am angry.” Jackson Lee promised
to introduce a police reform bill soon.

In the crowd, there was an edgy energy. Some passed out hand sanitizer and water. Others
got into the reflection pool. Alexis Nick, 23, and Kenisha Mynor, 25, weaved their way
down McKinney Street, leading chants of “No justice. No peace.”

Violence like the taking of Floyd’s life led Nick, who studied criminal justice, to want to
pursue a career in law. She was upset that the community had to rally like this to see justice
done — to see people who committed murder be charged with murder.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200603/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. A diverse, massive crowd turns out to rally peacefully for change, justice for one of their own

“This hits home for me,” Nick said. “It’s 2020 and we’re still fighting injustices that
African American men and women have faced. And if we’re being completely honest, it’s
frickin’ pitiful.”

As the speeches ended, the question became: What next?

In front of City Hall, Johnny Salazar and Rey Salvador, both 20, held an American flag.
They had spray-painted a clenched black fist on it, with the words “Black Lives Matter.” A
crowd of young protesters surrounding it whooped and cheered.

“People have had enough,” Salazar said. “Too many people have lost their lives.”

Dylan Allen, 20, of Greenspoint, came to take a photo with the pair. Previous killings have
drawn outrage — only for that outrage to die away, he said. He hoped that wouldn’t hap-
pen this time.

Small groups of protesters confronted police. “Say his name,” they yelled for a few min-
utes at two separate groups of officers. The officers stood quietly and showed little emo-
tion.

Another agitated crowd surrounded Police Chief Art Acevedo. The chief spoke to them in-
dividually, giving his phone number to one, verbally sparring with another.

“You don’t know what’s in my heart!” Acevedo said to one angry protester, who criticized
him.

He told protesters some of the changes for law enforcement need to come from legislative
fixes.

Some in the crowd demanded he release videos of recent officerinvolved shootings in
Houston. Acevedo offered varying reasons why the department hasn’t released bodycam
videos, including concerns from family members.

The skirmishes would increase as the sun set, but for now a 60year-old woman ap-
proached the back steps of City Hall and asked an officer manning a barricade if her two
grandchildren could take a photo with him.

Detective Kacey Saulsberry quickly moved the fence and walked down the stairs to pose
with Lauryn, 5, and London, 4. Both wore stickers of badges that said “junior police.”

“I just wanted to show them, let them be a part of something they probably will get to un-
derstand later in life,” said Latricia Tate, the grandmother. “Say, ‘We was there.’ You
know? ‘My granny took us.’”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200603/page/1/textview 3/3
