2020. 6. 17. Texans linebacker Jacob Martin hits boiling point, joins protests.

Texans linebacker Jacob Martin hits boiling point, joins
protests.

Linebacker joins Floyd protest hoping anger leads to change in attitudes on
racial issues

Houston Chronicle - 3 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Aaron Wilson STAFF WRITER

The anger and frustration have reached a boiling point for Texans outside linebacker Jacob
Martin.

 

graduate George Floyd, Martin is taking action and getting involved.

Martin, a Katy native, participated in the Floyd march on City Hall in Houston on Tuesday
afternoon, supporting the Floyd family along with Texans quarterback Deshaun Watson,
linebacker Peter Kalambayi and retired All-Pro wide receiver Andre Johnson, a special ad-
viser to head coach and general manager Bill O'Brien. Martin was doing his part through
his words and by providing bottled water to the marchers. When Martin was contacted by
rappers Trae the Truth and Mike Prince and asked to help the Black Lives Matter move-
ment, he didn’t hesitate and enthusiastically stepped up.

During this emotionally charged time after this latest death at the hands of police follow-
ing the killings of Anmaud Arbery and Breonna Taylor, Martin seeks to be an agent of
change and a strong voice of perspective.

“A lot of people have been quoting Martin Luther King about why riots happen and why
people protest, and it’s because people of color have reached their boiling point, their tip-
ping point,” Martin said in a telephone interview after completing virtual meetings in the
Texans’ offseason program. “I am angry and pissed off that this continues to happen in
our communi

“Change the landscape of the world — how we think, how we proceed going forward. ... Af-
ter this, things won’t be the same.” Texans LB Jacob Martin, on the hoped-for effect of the
Floyd protests

ty and to people of color.”

After the march, Houston Mayor Sylvester Turner praised Texans players for participating.
“Tt means we’re all in this together,” Turner said. “For our athletes, they don’t just play on
the field. They’re gladiators in the community. To see our athletes, our sports celebrities
and stars be participants in the struggle, it means for them you can be a football, basket-
ball, baseball, soccer player, but in this life we all have a role to play to make sure that jus-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200603/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Texans linebacker Jacob Martin hits boiling point, joins protests.

tice is had for every single person. Until everyone gets justice, no one gets it. And no one is
immune. I don’t care who you are.

“You can be the mayor of Houston or a star quarterback — it just doesn’t matter in this
life. Where there is inequity, racism, sexism — you name it — we all have a role to play to
eradicate it, and I’m just honored that our athletes have stepped up and said, ‘Count me in.
This is my movement as well.’ ”

Martin expressed hope and confidence that this large, organized outcry across the nation
will create positive and immediate effects. Not only in terms of action and how law en-
forcement authorities operate going forward, but in beliefs and how people of all races
treat each other and interact.

“Change the landscape of the world — how we think, how we proceed going forward, the
days of yesterday, the days before this, the times we remember,” Martin said. “After this,
things won’t be the same.

“The reality is that this has been going on in the black community and to people of color
for far too long. For generations growing up as a young AfricanAmerican man, you’ve been
afraid of police officers because of what your parents tell you and how to proceed. For that
to be the case with a public servant, it’s ridiculous. That shouldn’t be the case. You
shouldn’t have to have that conversation with your children. I pray that I don’t have to
have that conversation with my children one day in the future.”

As an NFL player, the Texans’

third-year pass rusher wants to use his platform to do whatever he can to make an impact.
That can be done in many ways. In March, Martin donated meals and supplies to families
in need in Houston’s Third Ward while volunteering with his father Lloyd and brother Eli-
jah.

“T think that those with the means to provide and speak out and reach large numbers of
people, it’s important to do so and not only to educate and inform, but to put our money
where it is needed most,” Martin said. “That’s through bail funds and donating to the
Black Lives Matter movement. There are tons of things you can do to get involved.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200603/page/1/textview 2/2
