2020. 6. 17. Justice Dept. blasted over Flynn case

Justice Dept. blasted over Flynn case
Retired judge: Intervention in case is ‘gross abuse’ of power

Houston Chronicle - 11 Jun 2020 - A1 -: By Charlie Savage and Adam Goldman

WASHINGTON — A retired federal judge accused the Justice Department on Wednesday of
a “gross abuse of prosecutorial power” and urged a court to reject its attempt to drop the
criminal case against Michael Flynn, President Donald Trump’s former national security
adviser.

ae,

Ke

The arguments in a 73-page brief by John Gleeson, the retired judge and former mafia
prosecutor appointed to argue against the Justice Department’s unusual effort to drop the
Flynn case, were the latest turn in a politically charged case that now centers on the ques-
tion of whether Flynn should continue to be prosecuted. He said Flynn should be sen-
tenced.

The Justice Department’s intervention last month, directed by Attorney General William
Barr, came after a long public campaign by Trump and his allies and prompted an outcry
from former law enforcement officials that the administration was further politicizing the
department.

Flynn’s lawyers and the Justice Department have sought to bypass Gleeson and the federal
judge in the case who appointed him, Emmet G. Sullivan. An appeals panel will hear argu-
ments Friday about whether to dismiss the case without allowing Sullivan to conduct his
review of the department’s request to withdraw the charge against Flynn.

Gleeson’s brief amounted to a step-by-step dissection of the factual claims and legal ar-
guments the Justice Department put forward last month to justify withdrawing a charge of
making false statements that Flynn had twice pleaded guilty to. Gleeson said the depart-
ment’s intervention was an example of the kind of “corrupt, politically motivated dis-
missals” that judges have the power to guard against.

“The reasons offered by the government are so irregular, and so obviously pretextual, that
they are deficient,” Gleeson wrote. “Moreover, the facts surrounding the filing of the gov-
ernment’s motion constitute clear evidence of gross prosecutorial abuse. They reveal an
unconvincing effort to disguise as legitimate a decision to dismiss that is based solely on
the fact that Flynn is a political ally of President Trump.”

But he also said that Flynn should not be held in criminal contempt of court for lying under
oath when he gave conflicting statements about his actions to Sullivan, a possibility that
the judge had raised when appointing Gleeson last month.

The Justice Department plans to file its response to Gleeson’s brief in the coming days. But
it is not clear whether Sullivan will get to complete his review and make the final decision.
Flynn’s lawyer, Sidney Powell, and the Justice Department have asked the Court of Appeals
for the District of Columbia Circuit to order him to dismiss the case against Flynn without
further review.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/2020061 1/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Justice Dept. blasted over Flynn case

They accused Sullivan of abusing his power by appointing Gleeson to offer counterargu-
ments rather than immediately ending the matter, citing a 2016 opinion by the appeals
court that said that the judiciary “generally lacks authority to secondguess” executive
branch decisions about whether to charge or drop a case.

In a filing last week before the appeals court, a lawyer for Sullivan urged a threejudge panel
not to short-circuit his review, saying he would not necessarily adopt the arguments put
forward by Gleeson.

The spectacle of both the district and appeals courts simultaneously dealing with the same
case is unusual, said Samuel Buell, a law professor at Duke University and a former federal
prosecutor. Gleeson’s filing will not legally affect the appeals court panel’s decision on
whether to end the case without further review, he said, but “it will contribute to the over-
all atmosphere with regard to the propriety of the government’s motion to dismiss.”

To justify Barr’s decision to drop the case, the Justice Department has argued that Flynn’s
lies were not “material” to any legitimate investigation — rejecting the department’s own
previous position that his lies were relevant to the counterintelligence inquiry into the
scope of Russia’s covert operation to tilt the 2016 election in Trump’s favor and the nature
of links to Trump campaign associates.

Gleeson, who had co-written an op-ed article calling into question the legitimacy of Barr’s
intervention before Sullivan appointed him, offered a blistering critique of that rationale.
“Pursuant to an active investigation into whether President Trump’s campaign officials
coordinated activities with the government of Russia, one of those officials lied to the FBI
about coordinating activities with the government of Russia,” Gleeson wrote. “It is hard to
conceive of a more material false statement than this one.”

Flynn pleaded guilty in December 2017 to lying to the FBI about his conversations with the
Russian ambassador, during the transition period after Trump won the 2016 election. The
Obama administration was taking actions to punish Russia for its interference in the
American democratic process, including imposing sanctions on Russian intelligence agen-
cies and expelling Russian officials from the United States. Flynn and the Russian ambas-
sador at the time, Sergey Kislyak, discussed the moves.

American officials intercepted those calls because they were wiretapping Kislyak. Recently
declassified transcripts showed that Flynn urged Moscow not to escalate the dispute —
holding out the prospect of working together after Inauguration Day.

The ambassador later told Flynn that he had conveyed “your proposal” and that Russia’s
government had decided to moderate its response as a result.

Flynn twice pleaded guilty to a criminal charge of making false statements. His plea was
part of a deal to cooperate with prosecutors, which also resolved Flynn’s criminal liability
for lying to the FBI about another part of his conversation with Kislyak involving a United
Nations issue, for failing to register as a paid foreign agent of Turkey in 2016, and for sign-
ing forms where he lied about that work.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/2020061 1/page/1/textview 2/2
