2020. 6. 17. Trump threatens military intervention

Trump threatens military intervention

ADDRESS: Halt violent protests or troops would ‘solve the problem for
them,’ governors told

Houston Chronicle - 2 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Darlene Superville, Tim Sullivan and Aaron Morrison

WASHINGTON — Wielding extraordinary federal authority, President Donald Trump
threatened the nation’s governors on Monday that he would deploy the military to states if
they did not stamp out violent protests over police brutality that have roiled the nation
over the past week. His announcement came as police under federal command forced back
peaceful demonstrators with tear gas so he could walk to a nearby church and pose witha
Bible.

  

ie a -
Trump’s rhetoric and actions came as the nation braced for another round of violence at a
time when the country is already buckling because of the coronavirus outbreak and the De-
pression-level unemployment it has caused. The president demanded an end to the heated
protests in remarks from the White House Rose Garden and vowed to use more force to
achieve that aim.
If governors throughout the country do not deploy the National Guard in sufficient num-
bers to “dominate the streets,” the president assured that the U.S. military will step in to
“quickly solve the problem for them.”
“We have the greatest country in the world,” the president declared. “We’re going to keep
it safe.”
Minutes before Trump began speaking, police and National
Guard soldiers began aggressively forcing back hundreds of peaceful protesters who had
gathered in Lafayette Park, across the street from the White House, where they were
chanting against police brutality and the Minneapolis death of George Floyd. As Trump
spoke, tear gas canisters could be heard exploding.
Floyd died last week after he was pinned to the pavement by a police officer who put his
knee on the handcuffed black man’s neck
“You don’t defuse violence by putting soldiers on the streets.” Oregon Gov. Kate Brown
until he stopped breathing. His death set off protests that spread from Minneapolis across
America. His brother Terrence pleaded with protesters on Monday to remain peaceful.
The demonstrators in Lafayette Park were cleared so that after his brief statement, Trump
could walk across the park to St. John’s Episcopal Church, known as “The Church of the
Presidents,” which suffered fire damage in one of the protests. Holding a Bible, he then
stood with several of his Cabinet members as the cameras clicked.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200602/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Trump threatens military intervention

The moment was quickly decried by Trump’s critics, with New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo
saying the president “used the military to push out a peaceful protest so he could have a
photo op at a church.“

“Tt’s all just a reality TV show for this president, “he said on Twitter. “Shameful.”

The country has been beset by angry demonstrations for the past week in some of the most
widespread racial unrest in the U.S. since the 1960s. Spurred largely by Floyd’s death, pro-
testers have taken to the streets to decry the killings of black people by police. Minneapolis
Officer Derek Chauvin has been charged with murder, but protesters are demanding that
three of his colleagues be prosecuted, too. All four were fired.

While most of the demonstrations have been peaceful, others have descended into vio-
lence, leaving neighborhoods in shambles, stores ransacked, windows broken and cars
burned, despite curfews around the country and the deployment of thousands of National
Guard members in at least 15 states.

On Monday, police fired tear gas at hundreds of protesters who spilled onto an interstate
highway in the heart of Philadelphia just before a 6 p.m. curfew took effect.

Earlier Monday, Trump told the nation’s governors in a videoconference that they “look
like fools” for not deploying even more National Guard troops. “Most of you are weak,” he
said.

He added: “You’ve got to arrest people, you have to track people, you have to put them in
jail for 10 years and you’ll never see this stuff again.”

Washington Gov. Jay Inslee, a Democrat, dismissed Trump’s comments as the “rantings of
an insecure man trying to look strong after building his entire political career on racism.”
Former Vice President Joe Biden, the Democratic presidential candidate, vowed to address
institutional racism in his first 100 days in office. He met in person with black leaders in
Delaware and also held a virtual meeting with big-city mayors.

Biden said hate emerges “when you have somebody in power who breathes oxygen into the
hate.”

In Oregon, Gov. Kate Brown said she won’t send in National Guard troops to help quell vio-
lent protests in Portland because they aren’t needed and “having soldiers on the streets of
America is exactly what President Trump

wants. “

At a news conference earlier Monday, Brown said she would send in 100 state police from
across Oregon to assist the city, and activate 50 Guard soldiers to work behind the scenes.
“You don’t defuse violence by putting soldiers on the streets,” the Democrat said.

In Minneapolis, meanwhile, Floyd’s brother Terrence made an emotional plea for peace at
the site where Floyd was arrested.

“Let’s switch it up, y’all. Let’s switch it up. Do this peacefully, please, “Terrence Floyd said
as he urged people to stop the violence and use their power at the ballot box.

Authorities in many cities have blamed the violence on outside agitators, though have pro-
vided little evidence to back that up.

But on Monday, federal authorities arrested a 28-year-old Illinois man, Matthew Lee Ru-
pert, saying he had posted self-recorded video on his Facebook page last week that showed
him in Minneapolis handing out explosive devices and encouraging people to throw them

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200602/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Trump threatens military intervention

at law enforcement officers. The video also showed him attempting to light a business on
fire, and looting, according to an FBI affidivit. Early Sunday, he posted more videos of
himself in and around Chicago, saying “let’s start a riot.”

He was arrested in Chicago for violating the city’s curfew.

More than 5,600 people nationwide have been arrested over the past week for such of-
fenses as stealing, blocking highways and breaking curfew, according to a count by The
Associated Press.

Police officers and National Guard soldiers enforcing a curfew in Louisville, Ky., killed a
man early Monday when they returned fire after someone in a large group shot at them,
police said. In Indianapolis, two people were reported dead in bursts of downtown violence
over the weekend, adding to deaths recorded in Detroit and Minneapolis.

While police in places tried to ease tensions by kneeling or marching in solidarity with the
demonstrators, officers around the country were accused of treating protesters with the
same kind of heavy-handed tactics that contributed to the unrest in the first place.

Cities struggled to keep police in line.

In Fort Lauderdale, Fla., an officer was suspended for pushing a kneeling woman to the
ground during a protest. In Atlanta, two officers were fired after bashing in the window of
a car and using a stun gun on the occupants. In Los Angeles, a police SUV accelerated into
several protesters, knocking two people to the ground.

In New York, the police commissioner said about six incidents were being investigated by
the department’s internal affairs bureau, including a weekend confrontation in Brooklyn
in which two police vehicles appeared to plow through a group of protesters. In another in-
cident, an officer pointed a gun at protesters, drawing condemnation from the mayor.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200602/page/1/textview 3/3
