2020. 6. 17. Faith leaders urge places of worship to stay closed.

Faith leaders urge places of worship to stay closed.

Local group posts video warning against reopening houses of worship too
early

Houston Chronicle - 27 May 2020 - Ai - By Robert Downen STAFF WRITER

Jewish, Muslim and Christian leaders in the Houston area are urging places of worship to
remain closed to combat the spread of COVID-19.

In a video posted Tuesday, leaders again warned against reopening congregations prema-
turely, and framed social distancing as an act of care for one’s neighbors.

“We support waiting so that our neighbors are safe,” the group said. “We support waiting
so that our hospitals are not overwhelmed. Caring for our neighbors means joining in the
fight to beat COVID-19. ... It means not increasing community spread.”

The video comes days after President Donald Trump deemed houses of worship as “essen-
tial,” a move that overruled restrictions put in place by states, cities and towns across the
nation.

“These are places that hold our society together and keep our people united,” the presi-
dent said last week.

Scott Jones, resident bishop of east Texas’ United Methodist conference, said he decided to
become involved with the video message in part because of Trump’s declaration.

“When President Trump talked about faith communities being essential, we wanted to
agree with that,” Jones said Tuesday. “We also wanted to be clear that freedom of religion
means we make our own decisions.”

In Texas, places of worship were allowed to resume in-person services earlier this month
under Gov. Greg Abbott’s plan to reopen the economy, so long as capacity was limited and
congregants practiced social distancing. The reopening followed weeks of fighting — and
lawsuits — over restrictions on in-person worship at churches in Harris County, among
other places.

Most churches have remained closed despite Abbott’s order. But some churches — includ-
ing Second Baptist Church of Houston, which has tens of thousands of members — have
since resumed limited services.

Catholic parishes in the area were also permitted to reopen under guidance from Daniel
DiNardo, cardinal of the Archdiocese of Galveston-Houston.

Sharig Ghani, director of Houston’s Minaret Foundation, said that the reopening of larger
churches has exacerbated some Muslims’ desires to pray at their mosques, particularly
during

‘“‘We support waiting so that our neighbors are safe ... not increasing community spread.”
Interfaith leaders in a video

Ramadan.

“There’s an enormous amount of Muslims that are looking at other churches” to gauge
whether they should reopen, Ghani said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200527/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Faith leaders urge places of worship to stay closed.

Meanwhile, public health officials have generally been opposed to reopening church ser-
vices, many of which are held in close quarters and so make it more likely for congregants
to catch the virus even if they wear masks and keep distance from one another.

They note that churches have often been linked to large outbreaks of COVID-19, a highly
contagious virus that is largely understood to spread through respiratory droplets.

In Washingon state, for example, nearly every member of a 60-person church choir tested
postive for the virus after meeting for practice in mid-March.

Of those, two died.

And last week, a Houstonarea Catholic church said it would again shutter its services after
five members of a religious order tested positive for coronavirus. The group shared a resi-
dence with a priest who died a few days after being diagnosed with pneumonia.

It’s still unclear what killed the Rev. Donnell Kirchner, but officials at his former church,
Holy Ghost Catholic Community, said Monday that the five people who tested positive re-
main in good health and are asymptomatic.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200527/page/1/textview 2/2
