2020. 6. 17. Hundreds of complaints but few citations for businesses.

Hundreds of complaints but few citations for businesses.

Businesses are violating capacity rules, but have yet to receive penalties
from the city

Houston Chronicle - 27 May 2020 - Ai - By Jasper Scherer and Zach Despart STAFF WRITERS

The video spread quickly across social media: dozens of people jammed into an outdoor
club in Midtown on Saturday, apparently exceeding the 25 percent capacity allowed under
Gov. Greg Abbott’s loosened coronavirus restrictions.

Houston Mayor Sylvester Turner, who on Friday had said he would not direct city officials
to enforce the governor’s order, reversed course after seeing a photo of the event, telling
Fire Chief Sam Pejia to have fire inspectors issue citations if necessary.

Clé Houston, which hosted the pool party, was the subject of 10 complaints to Harris
County alone, out of more than 1,200 reported to the city and county between Friday and
Monday. They included nightclubs, bars and restaurants, as well as businesses allowed to
operate without restrictions, such as churches, hardware stores and sporting goods retail-
ers.

Despite reports of crowded establishments and Turner’s pledge to enforce penalties start-
ing Sunday evening, however, the Houston Fire Department and Harris County Fire Mar-
shal issued zero citations.

The figures underscore how local leaders rely almost exclusively on voluntary compliance
by residents and businesses when enforcing Abbott’s coronavirus-related restrictions, in-
cluding his phased approach to reopening the Texas economy. The governor gave Harris
County bars and clubs the green light to open Friday for the first time since March 17,
though limited to 25 percent capacity. Restaurants, which had been limited to 25 percent,
could increase their dine-in capacity to 50 percent.

Since pandemic-related restrictions began in March, Harris County Fire Marshal Laurie
Christensen has yet to issue a single citation for the more than 12,000 complaints received
by the county. Christensen said to date, business owners have agreed to comply when in-
vestigators identify a violation.

The city of Houston has issued 10 citations, and none since May 9, Peijia said.

Further complicating the picture is the question of who should enforce Abbott’s orders:
Pefia said Houston fire officials can stop people from entering venues or halt overcrowded
events, while a spokesman for

the Texas Alcohol and Beverage Commission said the state agency is responsible for “reg-
ulating and enforcing” the order at establishments with liquor permits and generally has
relied on local entities to alert them of suspected violations. In response, Pefia said both
entities can enforce violations.

TABC, which can suspend a bar or restaurant’s liquor license for 30 to 60 days but cannot
force the business to close its doors, has yet to do so for any establishment in Texas, ac-
cording to spokesman Chris Porter. He said businesses have complied when TABC inspec-
tors informed them of potential violations.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200527/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Hundreds of complaints but few citations for businesses.

Turner on Friday said city officials twice have attempted to enforce Abbott’s order and
“didn’t get the backup from the state” when the businesses filed lawsuits against the city.
He said the city would not enforce the order until state officials do so first.

“The state has certain things that they can do. TABC can move to take away the permit,”
Turner said. "The state has to provide us with the assurance that this is an order that they
really want enforced, because otherwise, it puts the city in a vulnerable position.”

Turner since has given the fire department approval to enforce penalties despite TABC not
suspending any permits, though Pefia said officials are “primarily seeking voluntary com-
pliance with the occupancy threshold.”

Meanwhile, the TABC’s coronavirus guidelines state there is “no overall occupancy limit
outdoors” for bars and restaurants, seeming to allow for the Midtown pool party that
Turner cited for his change of heart.

Marty Lancton, president of the Houston Professional Fire Fighters Association, said fire-
fighters have no legal authority to shut down businesses that overstep capacity limits,
which he said was further undermined by Turner’s “flip-flop” on the issue.
“Enforcement of shaky political directives sends the wrong message to the city,” Lancton
said. “Our fire inspectors and arson investigators do amazing, important work, and they
should continue helping with public health and safety education, but the mayor has put
them in an impossible ‘enforcement’ position with city business owners and managers.”
City and county fire inspectors also must balance coronavirus related tasks with regular
duties. The Harris County Fire Marshal’s Office is one of the smallest local law enforce-
ment agencies; its 25 investigators also are responsible for routine inspections and major
probes of blazes along the Houston Ship Channel.

Most of the complaints fall to the Houston Fire Department to enforce, however. Midtown
alone had 31 complaints over the holiday weekend.

Thorny questions about enforcement also arose when County Judge Lina Hidalgo issued a
mandatory mask order on April 22, with violations punishable by a $1,000 fine. The unions
representing Houston Police Department officers and Harris County deputies said their
members were disinclined to enforce the order and Gov. Greg Abbott stripped cities and
counties of the ability to issue fines.

Hidalgo, who said she never intended to punish anyone, directed law enforcement to in-
stead focus on educating the public. Police handed out masks rather than citations.

Since Abbott’s orders reopening the economy override city and county decrees, local lead-
ers have little authority of their own, even as they worry the governor is moving too
quickly and creating favorable conditions for a resurgence of the virus.

Hidalgo last Thursday issued a new Stay Home, Work Safe order, though it bore little re-
semblance to her original stay-at-home directive in March, which closed most businesses
and required residents to remain homebound except for essential errands.

Her new order requires large venues to remain closed, including indoor concert venues,
performing arts spaces and amusement parks, but largely is a set of guidelines urging resi-
dents to avoid crowds.

The county judge, who repeatedly has said that only social distancing has helped Houston
avoid the nightmarish outbreaks in New York and Italy, said staying home still may be the

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200527/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Hundreds of complaints but few citations for businesses.

wise choice even though bars and clubs have reopened.
‘““We may well be in the eye of the hurricane. There’s still no cure, no vaccine,” Hidalgo
said. “I don’t want there to be any thought that we’ re letting our guard down.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200527/page/1/textview 3/3
