2020. 6. 17. Using tear gas on protesters in pandemic is a ‘recipe for disaster.’

Using tear gas on protesters in pandemic is a ‘recipe for dis-
aster.’

Expert: using irritants is ‘a recipe for disaster’ and can cause release of
more virus particles

Houston Chronicle - 8 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Will Stone

In nationwide demonstrations sparked by the killing of George Floyd in police custody,
protesters have been frequently peppersprayed or enveloped in clouds of tear gas. These
crowd-control weapons rarely are lethal, but in the middle of the novel coronavirus pan-
demic, there are strong calls for police to stop using these chemical irritants because they
can damage the body in ways that can spread the coronavirus and increase the severity of
COVID-19.

   

Even before the coronavirus pandemic, some experts said additional research was needed
on the risks of tear gas — an umbrella term for several chemical “riotcontrol agents” used
by law enforcement.

The coronavirus that causes the disease COVID-19 is highly contagious, spreads easily
through the air via droplets, and can lead to severe or fatal respiratory illness. Experts say
deploying these corrosive, inhalable chemicals could harm people in several ways: expos-
ing more people to the virus, compromising the body’s ability to fight off the infection and
even causing mild infections to become more severe illnesses.

“This is a recipe for disaster,” said associate professor Sven Eric Jordt, a researcher at the
Duke University School of Medicine who studies the effects of tear gas.

Jordt refers to these chemicals as “pain gases” because they activate certain pain-sensing
nerves on the skin and in the mucous membranes of the eyes, mouth and nose.

“You have this excruciating pain, sneezing, coughing, the production of a lot of mucus that
obstructs breathing,” Jordt said.

People who have been exposed describe a burning and stinging sensation, even a sense of
asphyxiation and drowning. Sometimes

the chemicals cause vomiting or allergic reactions. In law enforcement, officers generally
use two types of chemicals for crowd control: CS gas and pepper spray.

The active ingredient in pepper spray, called capsaicin, is derived from chiles. It is often
sprayed from cans at close quarters or lobbed into crowds in the form of “pepper balls.”

CS gas (o-chlorobenzylidene malononitrile) is a chlorinated, organic chemical that can in-
duce “very strong inflammation” and “chemical injury” by burning the skin and airways
when inhaled, Jordt said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200608/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Using tear gas on protesters in pandemic is a ‘recipe for disaster.’

“Using it in the current situation with COVID-19 around is completely irresponsible,” he
added. “There are sufficient data proving that tear gas can increase the susceptibility to
pathogens, to viruses.”

Jordt said research on the harms of tear gas has not kept up with its escalating use in the
U.S and around the world in recent years. Many of the safety studies that law enforcement
officials rely on date to the 1950s and ‘60s, he said.

But a 2014 study from the U.S. Army offers an alarming glimpse into how the chemical
could escalate the pandemic. The study found that recruits who were exposed to tear gas as
part of a training exercise were more likely to get sick with respiratory illnesses like the
common cold and the flu.

“We have a lot of antiviral defenses that can inactivate viruses and prevent them from en-
tering cells,” he said. “These are depleted by inhalation of tear gas and also compro-
mised.”

Even though there is a limited amount of research on the virus, there are studies from
China and Italy about how other irritants, such as smoking and air pollution, affect COVID-
19. These studies indicate that tear gas also could make people more likely to develop se-
vere illness, said Dr. John Balmes, a pulmonologist at the University of California-San
Francisco and an expert with the American Thoracic Society.

“T actually think we could be promoting COVID-19 by tear-gassing protesters,” said
Balmes. “It causes injury and inflammation to the lining of the airways.”

Balmes said this period of inflammation sets back the body’s defenses, and makes it more
likely that someone who already harbors the virus will become sick.

“It’s adding fuel to the fire,” Balmes said. “These exposures to tear gas would increase the
risk of progression from the asymptomatic infection to a symptomatic disease.”

Outdoor gatherings typically decrease the chance of spreading the coronavirus. But activi-
ties like singing and yelling can increase the risk.

Tear gas and pepper spray can also sow confusion and panic in a crowd. People may rip off
their masks and touch their faces, leading to more contamination.

Dr. Amesh Adalja, with Johns Hopkins University, said the reaction to the chemicals causes
people to shed more of the virus.

“If they’re coughing, the particles actually emanate and are projectiles that travel about 6
feet or so and could land on other people,” said Adalja, who also is a spokesperson for the
Infectious Diseases Society of America.

“This is a way to almost induce the virus to be expelled from people when they are exposed
to these agents.”

Adalja anticipates the protests will lead to a spike in infections.

“We know that any kind of social unrest, especially in the midst of an outbreak, is only go-
ing to make things worse,” he said.

Dr. Rohini Haar, an emergency physician in Oakland, Calif., has studied the use of riot-
control agents around the world.

“These weapons don’t actually deescalate tensions in peaceful community policing,” said
Haar, who is a lecturer at the University of California, Berkeley.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200608/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Using tear gas on protesters in pandemic is a ‘recipe for disaster.’

Haar recognizes there is a danger of spreading the virus at these gatherings, but she would
not discourage people from attending the protests and exercising their right to free speech.
“It’s a really tough situation,” Haar said. “I think the irony is that people are rightfully and
justifiably protesting police violence and are being met with violence that is worsening the
pandemic conditions we’ re living under right now.”

Last week, over a thousand physicians and health care professionals signed an open letter
in support of the demonstrations.

Dr. Jade Pagkas-Bather, an infectious disease expert at the University of Chicago, is one of
them. She said it will be difficult to determine whether any spike in cases was a direct re-
sult of the protests because they’re happening at a time when many states are also allow-
ing businesses to reopen.

“In everyday life, we weigh the risks and benefits of our actions,” she said. “People who
are going out to protests are clearly at a critical juncture where they are saying this state-
sanctioned violence is unacceptable, and I am willing to put myself and others potentially
at risk.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200608/page/1/textview 3/3
