2020. 6. 17. ‘Close to normal’ but 6 feet away

‘Close to normal’ but 6 feet away
Schools cap a year unlike any other with events to match

Houston Chronicle - 28 May 2020 - A1 - By Jacob Carpenter and Shelby Webb STAFF WRITERS

After weeks of worry that she would not get an in-person graduation ceremony, Clear Lake
High School senior Caroline Behr finally will walk across the stage to get her diploma Fri-
day — albeit with some major changes to the proceedings.

Se ae - , : a er; 7 = ; |

      
  

   

a

Her fellow Class of 2020 members will sit in chairs spread 6 feet apart, stretching from end
zone to end zone on the Challenger Columbia Stadium field. Graduates will wear masks
emblazoned with the school’s Falcons mascot. Behr will have only four family members in
attendance, about a third the number that cheered on her older sister’s Class of 2017.
“Ultimately, I’m just really thankful that I actually get to have a graduation,” said Behr,
who plans to attend Siena College in upstate New York this fall. “I know there are still a lot
of schools that won’t get to have one. It will be a crazy experience to remember.”

For many of Greater Hous

ton’s 85,000-plus seniors, the annual rite of passage commences Friday under open skies
and extensive public health guidelines, with local campuses hosting the region’s first in-
person, outdoor graduation events.

The celebrations will mark some of the largest face-to-face gatherings since widespread
restrictions on businesses, schools and large-scale events took hold in mid-March due to
the novel coronavirus pandemic.

Several school districts kick off their commencement season over the next few days, in-
cluding Cy-Fair, Fort Bend, Conroe, Clear Creek and Spring Branch ISDs.

“Our hope is that the experience is the same, although we are in a different time,” said
Elaina Polsen, Clear Creek ISD’s chief communications officer. “Nothing in the second se-
mester has been normal for our Class of 2020, and this was something we felt was an op-
portunity to move forward and do it for them.”

Gov. Greg Abbott approved inperson, outdoor graduations in early May, though indoor
ceremonies remain banned. Under guidelines issued by the Texas Education Agency, each

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200528/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. ‘Close to normal’ but 6 feet away

event carries numerous new restrictions and recommendations, prompting significant
tweaks to the pomp and circumstance.

To start, schools must cap the number of attendees to ensure social distancing rules can be
followed when people enter and exit venues. For many districts, that means no more than
four guests per graduate.

Schools also must ask students and family members whether they have experienced any
COVID-19 symptoms, screening out those considered at risk of exposing others.

At the event, families must remain separated by an appropriate distance in the stands, as
should graduates sitting among their peers. The distancing requirements mean nixing
several traditions: seniors entering the ceremony in a processional line, administrators
delivering diplomas by hand, graduates tossing their caps into the air.

Nevertheless, the chance to gather one last time as the Class of 2020 has lifted seniors’
spirits after weeks of canceled classes, proms and year-end celebrations.

Clear Lake High School senior Tommy Geremia looked forward to the possibility of for-
mally saying goodbye to classmates and snapping pictures in his cap and gown.

“I think all the precautions are fair, and if people have a problem with it, they just have to
realize we’re in the middle of this pandemic and it’s not just going to go away,” he said.
For many districts, the safety requirements have prompted numerous logistical chal-
lenges.

At Sealy High School, located west of Katy in Austin County, district officials struggled to
ensure proper social distancing ahead of their May 22 graduation ceremony, Principal Me-
gan Oliver said. Unlike districts in metro Houston, which could not hold events until Fri-
day, Sealy ISD received approval for an earlier graduation date from local and state officials
due to the low spread of COVID-19 in the area.

Ultimately, Oliver found a solution: color coding. Students were assigned numbers and
given a maximum of six tickets that were one of six colors. Families parked in the lots that
corresponded with their colors, walked through six separate gates, and sat in boxes
marked by tape around sections of the stands and track.

Rather than gather in one place and walk into the stadium, graduates walked onto the field
seats by themselves. Seniors were not allowed to hug and take photos after the ceremony,
but graduate Madeline Goad said seeing her friends was a blessing.

“That was my big thing: I wanted to see my class and be together knowing it was my last
time, knowing it was like a happy ending,” Goad said. “It was as close to normal as we
could get.”

In Angleton ISD, administrators plan to use 75 workers — about three times more than
normal — to ensure an orderly ceremony Friday for the district’s lone graduation event.
Staff and police will not require the use of face masks, which are not mandated under state
guidelines.

“We're making a lot of suggestions and we’re doing a lot of things when people come in
the stadium to help them get to their seats,” Angleton ISD Superintendent Phil Edwards
said. “We’re also asking for the public and the students to help us with safety and social
distancing.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200528/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. ‘Close to normal’ but 6 feet away

While many Houston-area schools plan to host in-person graduation events between late
May and the end of July, several districts have not committed to outdoor events.

To the frustration of some seniors and families, Houston ISD plans to host virtual gradua-
tion ceremonies for all 45 of its high schools starting June 14, and participate in a citywide,
studentsonly event June 5. Interim Superintendent Grenita Lathan said district officials
were “very concerned” about enforcing safety protocols, while also noting districts with
in-person events are “much smaller than we are.”

Other districts, including Katy, Aldine and Klein ISDs, still have indoor graduation events
on the books for the summer months, with no outdoor backup plans announced.

For Behr, the opportunity to walk across the stage delivers a dose of normalcy in the most
abnormal and memorable year of her life.

“T honestly know it’s going to be completely different from any other graduation,” Behr
said. “And I’m just going in with a positive mindset, hoping everything will go well.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200528/page/1/textview 3/3
