2020. 6. 17. » House expected to ease rules on small business loan program.

» House expected to ease rules on small business loan pro-
gram.

Requirements to be eased as small firms continue to struggle

Houston Chronicle - 28 May 2020 - Ai - By Benjamin Wermund

WASHINGTON — The U.S. House of Representatives is expected to vote as soon as Thurs-
day morning on a proposal to build more flexibility into the popular paycheck protection
loans meant to help small businesses weather the coronavirus outbreak, a program many
owners have said is too restrictive to be of much help.

 

Restaurant proprietors, especially, have pushed to ease requirements to have the loans
forgiven, with many saying they’re afraid to spend the money and get saddled with debt
otherwise. The Texas Restaurant Association estimates as many as 12 percent of the state’s
restaurants have closed for good during the pandemic, with some 700,000 jobs lost.

“You can drive down any city or town street and see the closure sign,” said Emily Knight,
president of the group, which has lobbied for weeks for the changes Congress is now con-
sidering. “It’s really tough out there. That's why this program has to work. We have to get
people back to work in Texas.”

In Texas, 352,993 loans had been approved as of May 23, totaling nearly $40.3 billion, the
second most in the nation.

The bipartisan effort would extend the period businesses have to spend the money. The
original deadline for many loan recipients is the end of June, and many business are just
beginning to open up again. The bill would expand the initial eight-week period to 24
weeks.

It would also build more flexibility into how the money can be spent. Currently, 75 percent
of the loan must go to payroll costs, something restaurant owners have said is virtually
impossible, especially in big cities like Houston and San Antonio where rent alone can ac-
count for more than a quarter of the cost of doing business.

The new proposal would lower that to 60 percent, giving businesses a little more leeway in
how they

spend — though the Texas Restaurant Association has said that still won’t be enough.

U.S. Rep. Chip Roy — a Republican whose district stretches from San Antonio to Austin and
is home to the most restaurants per capita in the state, employing some 50,000 Texans —

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200528/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. » House expected to ease rules on small business loan program.

led the effort for the GOP, coauthoring the original bill to fix the program, though the
House will vote on an updated bill Democrats filed on Wednesday.

“They’re just trying to stay afloat during all of this and we shouldn’t be micromanaging
what this will look like,” Roy said of small businesses.

The bill is expected to pass, though how much flexibility businesses will get in how they
can spend the money could emerge as a sticking point. Some lawmakers say eliminating
the requirement that a portion of the money be spent on payroll runs against the point of
the program, which was to make sure people were getting paychecks during the pandemic.
U.S. Rep. Lloyd Doggett, a San Antonio Democrat, cheered the additional flexibility:
“Where rent is higher, some need the ability to qualify for forgiveness, while keeping
workers working.”

But Roy and other Republicans favor scrapping that requirement all together. Knight said
the restaurant association also wants to see the requirement gone, but lowering the bar to
60 percent is “a step in the right direction.”

The bill would also offer a fiveyear repayment window on future paycheck protection
loans. Those issued already have to be paid within two years, if they aren’t forgiven — one
of the reasons business owners have been so cautious about using them.

Restaurants aren’t alone in pushing for the bill, which has the backing of a slew of busi-
ness groups, including the American Hotel and Lodging Association, the National Retail
Federation and the U.S. Chamber of Commerce.

Houston Mayor Sylvester Turner on Wednesday wrote to House Speaker Nancy Pelosi and
Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell urging them to pass the bill.

“Many small businesses are depending on this legislation passing quickly,” Turner wrote.
“Many are already four weeks into their PPP loan and need this flexibility before the for-
giveness timeline runs out.”

The relatively narrow bill is a departure from Congress’ approach to combating the coron-
avirus pandemic over the last several months, passing massive legislative packages total-
ing nearly $3 trillion.

The paycheck protection program has emerged as one of the most popular pieces of the re-
lief effort, and Congress has spent more than half a trillion dollars on it alone.

If the bill passes the House as expected, it will still need to clear the

Senate, where its prospects are less clear. An effort in the Senate to expand the timeline of
the loans to 16 weeks stalled earlier this month. The House bill would extend it to 24
months and would do much more.

Knight said U.S. Sens. Ted Cruz and John Cornyn, both Texas Republicans, have been sup-
portive of their effort, and she said the group will continue to lobby for the House version
to pass and “not a watered-down element.”

“If this doesn’t pass, you will see that number of closures accelerate,” she said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200528/page/1/textview 2/2
