2020. 6. 17. Texas A&M makes initial plans to reopen its 11 colleges this fall.

Texas A&M makes initial plans to reopen its 11 colleges this
fall.

The university’s initial intention is getting all 11 of its campuses back to
school in August

Houston Chronicle - 30 May 2020 - A1 - By Brittany Britto STAFF WRITER brittany.britto@chron.com

Texas A&M University System’s board of regents and Chancellor John Sharp announced
initial plans to reopen the system’s 11 colleges this fall with social distancing, contact trac-
ing, and classes both in-person and online.

During a Friday morning board meeting, Sharp said the university has made “a series of
decisions, which just a few months ago we couldn’t have imagined.” Like other colleges
around the country, the COVID-19 pandemic forced schools to close campuses and resume
classes online, but Sharp says that won’t be the case for long, at least not completely.

“It’s possible to educate someone online ... however it is the campus experience that brings
the camaraderie,” Sharp said. “You can get a degree online pretty easy, but it’s very hard
to become an Aggie online.”

Officials said that although practices will be adjusted to suit individual campuses, the ap-
proaches — with strict sanitation and health standards — will be the same.

James Hallmark, the system’s vice chancellor for academic affairs, said while face-to-face
classes will resume, all classes may not be offered in-person. The system is considering
various formats, including a hybrid one where students can attend classes in-person and
online at different periods. A&M officials are prioritizing which classes need to be held in
person. All courses will, however, be designed so they can be held remotely from the start
to reduce disruption should the need for total remote learning return.

Hallmark said Texas A&M officials are also discussing expanding the instructional day or
week, and possibly adjusting the academic calendar to start and end the semester before
the Thanksgiving holiday.

Residence halls are expected to operate relatively normal, but students will be encouraged
not to leave the university community and to report any exposure.

The resumption of athletics will depend on guidelines from health officials and sports
conferences.

A decision on whether personal protective equipment may be required or recommended
will be decided by the individual universities no later than July 31, according to the board’s
agenda briefing.

Those accommodations will also determine what the different colleges are able to do day-
to day. The A&M system includes the flagship in College Station, a campus in San Antonio
and Prairie View A&M University.

Testing will be available for faculty, staff and students who show symptoms.

Other Texas colleges have already announced initial plans for fall. Rice University plans to
reopen with classes that held simultaneously in-person and online, with flexible start

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200530/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Texas A&M makes initial plans to reopen its 11 colleges this fall.

dates for international students, and a shortened fall semester that ends before Thanks-
giving.

The University of Texas at Austin will also offer a shortened semester and ramped up test-
ing on campus, but officials are still working on how classes will operate.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200530/page/1/textview 2/2
