2020. 6. 17. » Texas unemployment benefits extended as jobless claims tick up.

» Texas unemployment benefits extended as jobless claims
tick up.

Applicants are now eligible for a full year of assistance Another 800 people
in area facing layoffs amid downturn

Houston Chronicle - 5 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Erin Douglas STAFF WRITER By Erin Douglas and Gwendolyn Wu STAFF
WRITERS

More than 100,000 in Texas applied for unemployment benefits last week, according to the
Department of Labor, as the number of jobless Texans continues to rise, although at a
slower pace.

Fant Ba

   

The number of people who lost work since March when business shutdowns to slow the
novel coronavirus began is at least 2.3 million, according to federal data. State data, how-
ever, suggests it may be closer to 3 million — about 20 percent of the state’s labor force of
13 million.

Nationally, more than 40 million have filed jobless claims, with 1.9 million people applying
for first-time unemployment benefits last week.

The Texas Workforce Commission, the state’s unemployment agency, said

More than 800 workers at Houston-area companies face unemployment, according to lay-
off notices filed with the Texas Workforce Commission during the past two weeks.

Among the companies planning layoffs are an oil industry pipe manufacturer and two
large health care companies.

Texas Steel Conversion, which manufactures drill pipe, said it may lay off its entire work-
force — almost 500 employees — amid the coronavirus pandemic and oil collapse that has
forced energy companies to slash production and cut thousands of jobs in recent months.
Texas Steel Conversion, which manufacturers metal tubing and pipe for the oil field indus-
try, said in a lay

this week that unemployment benefits will be extended for another 13 weeks, since the
state triggered an emergency federal program after reporting a high unemployment rate
for April. That means claimants will be eligible for a full year of unemployment benefits,
since the state program of 26 weeks had already been extended 13 weeks by the federal
CARES Act.

Texas’ unemployment rate was 12.8 percent in April, marking the highest jobless rate since
recordkeeping began in 1976.

First-time claims for jobless benefits have slowed in Texas for five consecutive weeks. Last
week, they fell to about one-third the 315,000 claims filed at the peak in early April. Claims
peaked nationally at nearly 7 million at the end of March.
https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200605/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. » Texas unemployment benefits extended as jobless claims tick up.

The TWC has paid nearly $10 billion in unemployment benefits this year, according to
agency data. Well over half of that has been paid with the CARES Act.

Even so, about 800,000 Texans have not received one unemployment benefit check for
their claim, an analysis of data provided by the state shows.

Unemployment agencies across the country were overwhelmed by the avalanche of claims,
and processing has been slow. In Texas, the workforce commission has 1,000 people an-
swering calls related to unemployment benefits, a spokesperson said, but out-of-date
technology and the sheer volume of claims makes processing checks an arduous task.

As Texas moves through a reopening plan and most businesses can operate at 50 percent
capacity, some employees are heading back to work. But the coronavirus remains a risk.
The TWC said since the virus is still spreading, the agency will allow some claimants to
refuse to go back to work and continue to collect benefits for a few limited reasons, includ-
ing if the employee is 65 years or older and has a high risk of contracting the virus. Those
exceptions are evaluated case by case.

Millions in Texas remain jobless and are continuing to request benefits, federal data
shows, even as social distancing orders ease. Layoffs have continued, particularly in Hous-
ton, where an oil bust is putting employers in the energy capital of the world under pres-
sure. In the oil and gas extraction industry alone, Houston employers slashed 3,900 jobs in
April from the same month last year.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200605/page/1/textview 2/2
