2020. 6. 17. At Floyd service, an anguished call for change

At Floyd service, an anguished call for change

Family members, civil rights leaders gather for first of several memorials
for slain man

Houston Chronicle - 5 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Dionne Searcey

MINNEAPOLIS — Hundreds of people filed into a Minneapolis chapel Thursday to remem-
ber George Floyd, the man whose death at the hands of police opened a nationwide flood of
anguish, protest and demands for change in American policing.

   
  
 

By turns somber and defiant, the mourners celebrated Floyd as a friend and father and un-
cle to those closest to him, but also as a victim of racial injustice whose killing had drawn a
legion of people to the streets.

“George Floyd’s story has been the story of black folks,” the Rev. Al

Sharpton said in a eulogy of Floyd, who died after a white police officer held him down on a
Minneapolis street with a knee to Floyd’s neck for nearly nine minutes. “Because ever
since 401 years ago, the reason we could never be who we wanted and dreamed of being is
you kept your knee on our neck.”

The gathering, the first of several memorials for Floyd in different cities in the coming
days, drew Floyd’s family members, political

leaders, civil rights leaders and celebrities — many in masks out of concern for the coron-
avirus.

“We were smarter than the underfunded schools you put us in,” Sharpton said. “But you
had your knee on our neck. We could run corporations and not hustle in the streets, but you
had your knee on our neck. We had creative skills; we could do whatever anybody else cou...
do. But we couldn’t get your knee off our neck.”

“It’s time to stand up and say ‘get your knee off our necks,’ ” Sharpton went on, as rau-
cous applause broke out in the university sanctuary where Floyd’s body rested inside a
closed, shiny copper coffin.

All the while, marches were taking place around the country Thursday, as thousands of
people in cities far from Minneapolis poured into parks and streets calling for an end to
systemic racism in the justice system on a 10th day of protests. Demonstrators marched in
cities including New York; Nashville, Tenn.; Seattle; and Santa Monica, Calif. And around
the country, people watched the eulogy to Floyd on television and online.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200605/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. At Floyd service, an anguished call for change

The two-hour service served as a call for activism after more than a week of upheaval
prompted by the video of the police officer kneeling on Floyd’s neck as he lay face down
and handcuffed on the pavement, saying, “I can’t breathe.”

In a service punctuated by gospel music, Floyd’s relatives told personal stories of the man
they knew as Perry and whom people in the neighborhood had called “Big Floyd.” He hada
gift at making people feel welcome. His brother Philonise Floyd called him a “general,”
someone who always had a line of friends behind him.

“Everywhere you go and see people, how they cling to him. They wanted to be around
him,” he said.

“Being in the house with my brother, it was inspiring,” he added, “because my mom used
to take in other kids, and they were George’s friends.”

He recalled sharing a bed with his big brother. Together, they played football and ate ba-
nanaand-mayonnaise sandwiches and used an oven to dry their socks.

One of his cousins, Shareeduh Tate, said, “The thing I miss most about him is his hugs. He
was just this big giant.”

A mural above the dais of the Frank J. Lindquist Sanctuary at North Central University de-
picted

Floyd’s face above the words “Now I can breathe.” An usher stood watch over the coffin,
which was surrounded by white c.

The death of Floyd, 46, on May 25 in front of a corner market called Cup Foods in Min-
neapolis has galvanized a nation, with protesters pouring into the streets in cities and
small towns alike, as well as across the world.

Sharpton, who denounced violent protests and lootings that have occurred in some places,
said he was heartened that Floyd’s death, captured on cellphone video and shared globally,
had moved white people to join demonstrations condemning misconduct against black
Americans.

“When I looked this time and saw marches where in some cases young whites outnum-
bered the blacks marching, I know that it is a different time and a different season. When I
looked and saw people in Germany marching for George Floyd, it’s a different time and a
different season,” he said, citing verses from Ecclesiastes, and then adding, “I come to tell
you America, this is the time of building accountability in the criminal justice system.”

On Saturday, Floyd is to be remembered in Raeford, N.C., where some of his family lives,
and another memorial is planned Monday in Houston, where Floyd lived for many years.
The ceremony in Minneapolis was open only to invited guests and family members, but
hundreds of people gathered outside. On the street, T-shirts with images of Floyd and the
words “I can’t breathe” were on sale.

“George Floyd really sparked a movement that was brewing to happen,” said Nataly Quin-
tero, who waited in the crowd outside.

Quintero, who is Latina, said she wanted to show solidarity with black Americans. “We can
feel our blood boil over the injustice. It’s a historical moment.”

The service came a day after more serious charges were announced against the white po-
lice officer who wedged his knee onto Floyd’s neck, Derek Chauvin, and after charges were
issued against three other officers who participated in the arrest. All have been fired.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200605/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. At Floyd service, an anguished call for change

The state of Minnesota has filed a civil rights charge against the Minneapolis police force
over Floyd’s death, pledging to investigate whether the department has engaged in sys-
temic discriminatory practices.

Floyd had moved to Minneapolis about five years ago, after leaving his home in Houston
where he had been a star football and basketball player at Yates High School. When he re-
turned to Houston for his mother’s funeral two years ago, he told a cousin that Minneapo-
lis had come to feel like home.

The city he adopted now stands full of tributes and memorials to him; in recent days, the
names of other black men and women killed by police officers across the country have been
written in large pink, blue, yellow and green chalk letters on the street where Floyd was ar-
rested.

As the memorial service came to a close Thursday afternoon, mourners were asked to
pause and stand for eight minutes and 46 seconds — the amount of time Floyd spent on
the ground, the police officer’s knee pressing into his neck.

During the long silence, some in the crowd wept behind masks.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200605/page/1/textview 3/3
