2020. 6. 17. TECHBURGER

TECHBURGER
With all the bad news, a cyber diet is the cure for doomscrolling.

Houston Chronicle - 11 Jun 2020 - A1 - DWIGHT SILVERMAN

My lovely wife deleted Twitter and Facebook from her iPhone last week. After spending too
long scrolling though social posts and news items late at night, it was affecting her mood
and her sleep. She is something of a news junkie, but for her peace of mind, it was time for
the nuclear option.

 

Neal seas
That’s one way of dealing with news fatigue, which likely is plaguing us all in “these chal-
lenging times,” as the now wince-worthy cliche goes. From the coronoavirus pandemic to
police violence to protests in the streets to partisan toxicity, the news bears down on us
hour by hour, minute by minute, delivered in nonstop, rapid-fire succession on our smart-
phones, our PCs, our TVs.
There’s even a term for doing what my wife was doing, swiping through one overwhelrmi...
news story after another on her smartphone: doomscrolling.
How do you process all that, along with stories about swarms of Japanese murder hornets
that rip the heads off whole colonies of bees, or hordes of poisonous cane toads breeding
wildly in Florida as icing on the cake? Apocalypse now, indeed.
For a lot of folks, it’s not a simple matter of not looking at the news. Although hardly sci-
entific, I polled my Twitter fol
lowers last week, asking if they doomscrolled and how it made them feel. The option most
selected: “I can’t help myself.”
Fortunately, there are strategies and tactics you can use to control how much news you
consume. They include some discipline on your part, as well as some tools on your devices
and apps you can install. Think of it as drinking from a water fountain rather than a fire-
hose.
Go on a news diet: In the dark ages of information delivery, news came to you in controlled
bursts. The newspaper was on your doorstep in the morning, the news was on the family
TV at dinnertime. Radio delivered news bites during the day, between spins of Top 40
tunes and commercials for the local hardware store. We can’t go back to that kind of news
cycle, but you can use time to throttle the nonstop flow.
Start by setting a limited, scattered amount of time each day to peruse the news, whether
on television, websites, social media, radio or smart speakers. Let’s say you want to con-
sume only 90 minutes worth of news a

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/2020061 1/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. TECHBURGER

day. Spend 30 minutes in the morning checking news sites, your social feeds, maybe TV.
Hit your sources again for 30 minutes around lunchtime, if work permits, and then again
after dinner.

But if you find the news disconcerting enough that it may keep you from sleeping, don’t
watch the late TV news or pick up your phone before bed. What happens will happen
whether you look at it or not, and the details will still be there in the morning, when a good
night’s sleep will make you better able to absorb it.

Turn off notifications: Your smartphone beckons when notifications fire off, and they’re
often difficult to ignore. You can disable notifications selectively based on app on both An-
droid and iOS devices, or can turn off notifications completely. I recommend the former,
because even if you’re trying to cut down on your news anxiety, notifications telling you
about communication from friends and family are healthy (well, usually).

You can also change how notifications are displayed by setting them so they don’t show up
on the lock screen and only appear as a number displayed on an app’s icon. Fine-tune no-
tifications so they’re not constantly calling you to doomscroll.

Use screen time tools: Current versions of both iOS and Android have built-in tools that
help you limit screen time. On iPhones and iPads, they’re under Screen Time; on Android,
they’ re called Digital Wellbeing. They can help you enforce your news diet by limited how
long you can have apps running on your phone.

In iOS you can set limits for individual apps, or for whole categories of apps, such as social
media or “news and reference.”

Use Twitter Lists: One of Twitter’s most useful features is Lists, which lets you create col-
lections of accounts based on criteria you choose. Create a list with news sources, and only
dive in there as needed. Create other lists of friends, funny accounts, or those that show
animal videos. Then, rather than going into your main Twitter feed, choose a list based on
what you need or want to see.

Use a news aggregation app: When I don’t want a news firehose from social media, I
launch Apple News on my iPhone or iPad, which shows selected stories based on my inter-
est. Google News is similar, and is available on both iOS and Android.

And another alternative is SmartNews from smartnews.com, which is similar in format to
Apple News but also is available on Android. It’s excellent at learning over time what sto-
ries interest you — as well as those you don’t want to see.

Yeah, I know, it’s ironic to get tips from someone who works for a news organization about
how to consume less news. But these are offered in the same spirit as smartphone manu-
facturers who have included tools I mentioned to help you curb internet addiction.

It’s good to be informed, but it’s unnecessary to be overwhelmed.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/2020061 1/page/1/textview 2/2
