2020. 6. 17. Abbott calls for peace in Texas cities.

Abbott calls for peace in Texas cities.

Governor calls killing of Floyd ‘a horrific act of police brutality,’ says riot-
ing no solution

Houston Chronicle - 3 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Jeremy Blackman

AUSTIN — Gov. Greg Abbott on Tuesday called for peace amid ongoing unrest, as thou-
sands have taken to the street in cities across Texas to protest racism and police brutality.
Speaking in Dallas after a fourth night of reported violence by some civilians and law en-
forcement officers, the Republican governor pushed a unifying message, calling the recent
killing of a black man by a Minneapolis police officer “a horrific act of police brutality,”
but saying he refuses to tolerate violence as a response.

“TI join the millions of Americans seeking swift justice in this case,” Abbott said, at times
raising his voice in apparent anger. “However, violence and vandalism have no place in
Texas.”

Abbott and Dallas Mayor Eric Johnson, a Democrat, both emphasized that the majority of
protesters have been peaceful, blaming violence and looting on extremists and “crimi-
nals” from other areas.

“These are outsiders who came into our city causing trouble, knowing that they wouldn’t
have to live with the consequences,” Johnson said.

The remarks came as the family of the man killed, George Floyd, prepared to march along-
side thousands in downtown Houston, where Floyd grew up and lived much of his life.
Floyd was killed last week as the officer, who is white, pinned Floyd’s neck to the ground
until minutes after he his body went limp.

The killing has sparked outrage and renewed calls for criminal justice reforms. On Mon-
day, President Donald Trump chastised governors for not being tough enough on the pro-
testers, and threatened to send in the military if they don’t.

In Texas, protests over the

weekend descended at times into violence as demonstrators hurled objects at officers and
law enforcement shot tear gas and nonlethal rounds at crowds. Several hundred arrests
were made.

Abbott, a close ally of the president, has not clarified who the extremists are, but Steve
McCraw, the director of the Texas Department of Public Safety, on Tuesday called out
members of Antifa — an umbrella for loosely knit groups of far-left militants known for
escalating confrontations with the police. Local police have also said some far-right ac-
tivists are exploiting largely peaceful demonstrations in the hopes of inciting violence.
Abbott was among the first governors to dispatch national guardsmen this weekend in re-
sponse to the demonstrations. He insisted Tuesday that Texas has been a leader in police
reform, but vowed to work alongside lawmakers to see what additional measures they
might take.

“‘We’re open to putting everything on the table and working toward positive solutions that
will improve Texas,” Abbott said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200603/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Abbott calls for peace in Texas cities.

Earlier on Tuesday, opponents attacked the governor for failing to acknowledge systemic
injustices and having signed a law in 2017 that encouraged racial profiling of immigrants.
“Words must give way to action, and Gov. Abbott has done nothing to stop racially moti-
vated police violence across our state and across our country,” Texas Democratic Party
Deputy Executive Director Cliff Walker said in a statement.

William Hoston, a professor who focuses on state government at Prairie View A&M
University, said the protests comes after years of failure by state leadership to develop
trust with minority communities after other killings and incidents of excessive force.
“We’re beyond George Floyd now,” he said. “What you’re seeing now is a group of human
beings tired of structural racism and discrimination.”

But nationally, President Trump has doubled down against protesters. At the White House
on Monday night, officers dispersed peaceful crowds with tear gas so the president could
walk across the street to pose outside of a church holding a Bible.

“The president threatened to use the United States military against United States citizens
exercising their rights enshrined in the United States Constitution,” said U.S. Rep. Lizzie
Fletcher, a moderate Houston Democrat, in an unusually fiery statement. “The actions the
president has threatened to take violate not only our rights but also the sacred trust that
we the people place in our government — a government of, by, and for the people.”

Rep. Henry Cuellar, another moderate Texas Democrat, tweeted: “A president’s role is not
to use the shameful acts of a few in order to respond with indiscriminate force against all
citizens, but rather defend democracy, not violate or deprive it.”

At least one recent poll indicated that most — 58 percent — of registered voters would
support calling in the military to supplement police forces amid the unrest.

And Texas Republicans have mostly voiced support for the president’s call for more force.
“The president is sending a strong message to state and local authorities that they need to
use the resources available to them because we simply can’t tolerate this sort of lawless-
ness,” Sen. John Cornyn said in a Fox News interview Tuesday.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200603/page/1/textview 2/2
