2020. 6. 17. Minn. under state of emergency as protests of man’s death turn violent

Minn. under state of emergency as protests of man’s death
turn violent

Dept. of Justice says its probe is ‘top priority’

Houston Chronicle - 29 May 2020 - A‘ - Julian Gill contributed to this report.

Gov. Tim Walz activated the Minnesota National Guard on Thursday after two nights of es-
calating protests following the death of George Floyd, declaring a state of emergency in
Minneapolis, St. Paul and surrounding communities.

   

Protests erupted across South Minneapolis on

Wednesday into early Thursday morning after former Houston resident Floyd, who was
black, died in police custody Monday. He repeatedly said, “I can’t breathe,” while being
detained by a white police officer, who was fired after the encounter.

The governor said that he supported peaceful demonstrations but that the destruction
Wednesday night warranted further action to keep the peace. During the pro

tests, police fired tear gas and rubber bullets as people set buildings on fire and looted
stores.

“Unfortunately, some individuals have engaged in unlawful and dangerous activity, in-
cluding arson, rioting, looting, and damaging public and private property,” Walz wrote in
his proclamation. “These activities threaten the safety of lawful demonstrators and other
Minnesotans, and both first responders and demonstrators have already been injured.”
‘Executed him in daylight’

After a night of demonstrations, ash fell Thursday morning at a shopping center on Lake
Street, where the recently renovated Target had been defaced and looted. A nearly com-
pleted apartment development across the street had been burned to its concrete lower
floor. Other commercial structures were also badly damaged.

At anews conference Thursday afternoon, Mayor Jacob Frey said the destructive protests
were a reflection of the black community’s anger over 400 years of inequality.

“What we’ve seen over the last two days and the emotion-ridden conflict over the last
night is the result of so much built up anger and sadness,” he said.

Frey declared an “all-out effort to restore peace and security” in the city, and said he has
authorized a “unified command structure” to protect infrastructure and communities,
particularly during the pandemic.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200529/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Minn. under state of emergency as protests of man’s death turn violent

“In believing in our city, we must believe that we can be better than we have been,” the
mayor said. “We must confront our shortcomings with both humility, as well as hope. We
must restore the peace, so that we can do this hard work together.”

Floyd, 46, died after being handcuffed and pinned to the ground by a white police officer
who pressed his knee on Floyd’s neck for several minutes. A video of the arrest, in which he
is heard pleading “I can’t breathe,” spread widely online.

“They executed my brother in broad daylight,” Philonise Floyd told CNN on Thursday,
breaking down in tears. “I am just tired of seeing black people dying.”

Floyd’s death also spurred protests in Memphis, Tenn., and in

Los Angeles, where law enforcement officials faced off with people blocking the 101 free-
way downtown.

The Houston chapter of Black Lives Matter is hosting a rally Friday at Discovery Green to
protest police violence.

On Thursday afternoon, Houston Mayor Sylvester Turner and Texas Sen. John Whitmire,
who serves as chair of the Senate Criminal Justice Committee, issued a joint statement
condemning the officers’ actions.

“What happened in Minneapolis amplifies the events surrounding any loss of life of a per-
son involving police officers anywhere in the country and further damages the relationship
between the police and the community, and specifically communities of color,” according
to a portion of the statement. “That is why we must uniformly speak out against what oc-
curred in Minneapolis as totally unjust and unacceptable.”

Investigation begins

Four officers involved in the arrest were fired from the Minneapolis Police Department,
and the FBI joined the investigation into the death of Floyd, a resident of St. Louis Park,
Minn. On Wednesday, Frey, the mayor, called for the police officer who had pressed his
knee to Floyd’s neck to be arrested and charged.

The Justice Department said in a statement Thursday that it had made a federal investiga-
tion into Floyd’s death a “top priority” and would investigate the officers involved and de-
termine whether they should face federal criminal charges. The department “urges calm as
investigators methodically continue to gather facts,” the statement said.

The violence came at the end of what had been a tense period.

Protesters began gathering Wednesday afternoon outside the 3rd Precinct headquarters,
but by early evening, officers were trying to disperse the crowds using flash-bang
grenades and tear gas.

Some residents of the area said Thursday that they believed people from outside the city
had been responsible for a large portion of the fires and looting.

“This is just painful,” said Cynthia Montana, 57. “I don’t think the people who did the
looting and all this destruction are the same as the peaceful protesters that have been at
Cup Foods,” where Floyd was arrested Monday.

“T’m a protester,” Montana said. “It was so peaceful over there.”

Floyd’s family called for murder charges against the officers involved in his arrest.

The Minneapolis Police Department on Wednesday identified the fired officers as Derek
Chauvin, Thomas Lane, Tou Thao and J. Alexander Kueng.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200529/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Minn. under state of emergency as protests of man’s death turn violent

President Donald Trump has condemned the actions by the officers caught on video and
urged the department to expedite the investigation, but he has not reached out to Floyd’s
family. During a news conference Thursday, Trump declined to say whether the officers
should be prosecuted, but he called the video “shocking.”

Minor protests and looting continued Thursday, forcing the evacuation of the state Capitol.
St. Paul police officers encountered large groups of people stealing merchandise from a
Target store and other businesses in the city’s Midway neighborhood, said St. Paul Police
Department spokesman Steve Linder.

Some threw rocks, bottles and bricks at the responding officers, while another group of
people rushed into a Foot Locker in an attempt to “pillage” sneakers, he said, noting that a
fight broke out in the parking lot between a pedestrian and a driver who tried to run the
person over.

“Our officers have been busy trying to keep things calm and deescalate when possible, and
protect people and property,” said Linder. “It’s beyond just St. Paul,” he said, referring to
instances of “flash looting.”

In a report on Floyd’s arrest, the Minneapolis police said they had been investigating an
accusation of someone trying to pass a fake $20 bill on Monday in the southern part of the
city when they confronted a man who was sitting on a blue car and was later identified as
Floyd.

“He was ordered to step from his car,” the police department said in a statement Monday.
“After he got out, he physically resisted officers. Officers were able to get the suspect into
handcuffs and noted he appeared to be suffering medical distress.”

Video footage from nearby security cameras and bystanders did not show any attempt by
Floyd to resist officers. Instead, it showed him begging for his life as he lay handcuffed on
the ground, one officer grinding a knee into his neck while three others stood by.

The Minneapolis Police Department has received many excessive force complaints, espe-
cially from black residents.

One of the officers involved in Floyd’s death, Chauvin, 44, had several complaints filed
against him, three of which led to reprimands for his language and tone.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200529/page/1/textview 3/3
