2020. 6. 17. SPORTS

SPORTS
Astros to open Minute Maid, spring training facility today.

Houston Chronicle - 25 May 2020 - A1 - By Chandler Rome STAFF WRITER

The Astros will open Minute Maid Park and their spring training facility in West Palm
Beach, Fla., for individual workouts Monday, more than two months after both premises
were closed amid the coronavirus pandemic.

“The ability to reopen the facilities in any way is a critical step, it’s a hopeful step, and it’s
an exciting step,” general manager James Click said. “It’s important, I think, to do it now
because we are going to need time to see how it goes and wait to see what comes out of it,
much like any other reopening of any other business.”

The Astros began plotting their return last week when Gov. Greg Abbott ordered the state
to enter phase 2 of its reopening. Included in Abbott’s executive order was the reopening of
gyms and exercise facilities at 25 percent capacity. Abbott also said professional sports
would be clear to return without fans May 31.

Click estimated “roughly half a dozen” players will work out at each facility

alongside organizational coaches and other assorted staff. The Astros worked in conjunc-
tion with Major League Baseball to construct a return plan filled with restrictions and
safety measures.

Workouts will be staggered throughout the day to prevent overcrowding of facilities. Most
work will be staged outdoors, where Click said the spread of the virus is slower. Players are
expected to wear masks when not engaged in athletic activity, Click said, and all other staff
members will don personal protective equipment.

Focus for now is on the team’s 40-man roster players, Click said. Michael Brantley, Myles
Straw, Zack Greinke, Brad Peacock, Yuli Gurriel and Yordan Alvarez are among the 40-man
members who either live in or are training in Florida. George Springer, Alex Bregman,
Lance McCullers Jr., Austin Pruitt, Carlos Correa and Jose Altuve are among the large group
in Houston.

“For better or for worse, a lot of these guys have had access to some pretty nice facilities
throughout this process,” Click said. “The need for them to get into the park isn’t as great
as some other guys. A lot of the benefit of this is just getting individual attention from staff
and the professionalism and expertise our staff can lend to these guys.”

Neither manager Dusty Baker nor pitching coach Brent Strom is in either location. Baker
has been in

California and Strom at his offseason home in Tucson, Ariz. Click said organizational
coaches who are local to Houston and Florida will be in attendance but declined to reveal
an exact list.

Activities will be strictly individualized, with the exception of bullpen sessions. Click said
pitchers who want to throw in the bullpen will be “closely monitored.” Each man will have
his own set of baseballs to limit multiple people touching the same surface.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200525/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. SPORTS

“We'll try to mix in hitting and infield work, but there are going to be safety restrictions on
how those are done,” Click said.

Though the reopening of both facilities signals a significant step toward an onfield product
in 2020, pitfalls are still numerous. Major League Baseball and its players association are
engaged in negotiations over safety and salaries in hopes of resuming the regular season in
early July.

Feeling around the industry is the coming week will be crucial in the negotiating process.
That the Astros began it by opening back up gave Click some comfort.

“The fact that we can do it now and give ourselves real time to see how it goes — to see
what’s practical, to see what works and what doesn’t, and to see what the effects are —
gives me a lot of hope that we have time to figure out the rest of it before we have to make a
decision about what we’re doing with the rest of the season,” Click said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200525/page/1/textview 2/2
