2020. 6. 17. Biles back home training but says she’d be OK with walking away.

Biles back home training but says she’d be OK with walking
away.

Biles doesn’t rule out retirement if postponed 2021 Tokyo Games are called
off altogether

Houston Chronicle - 30 May 2020 - A1 - By David Barron

Simone Biles is back in her family’s Montgomery County gym and training toward the de-
layed 2021 Olympics, but she says she would be comfortable walking away from the sport if
the Tokyo Games do not come off as planned next year.

Speaking on an ESPN podcast Thursday co-hosted by two-time soccer gold medalist and
ESPN analyst Julie Foudy, Biles, 23, was asked what she would do if COVID-19 concerns
prohibit the rescheduled Olympics from taking place next July.

“T do not know what I would do,” Biles said. “I’m just praying for the best, hoping that it
goes on for selfish reasons, of course, but for all the athletes around the world working to-
ward this dream.

“T hope it gets to go on, but, then again, you never know. If everybody’s health is at risk,
we shouldn’t host it.”

Biles said in January that she expected 2020 to be her final year as a competitive gymnast.
She said in late March that she considered giving up the sport after the Olympic delay was
announced but decided that “I’ve made it this far. You can’t give it up now, I’ve worked too
hard to just give it all away.”

A four-time Olympic gold medalist and five-time world all-around champion who has
four elements named for her in the scoring system code of points for gymnastics, Biles
said she is comfortable with her accomplishments regardless of what happens in the next
year and a half.

“T could walk away from the sport and feel like I accomplished more than I ever actually
imagined,” she said. “When I was younger, all I wanted was a college scholarship, and
then I wanted to go to the world championships and Olympics. I’ve been to five worlds and
one Olympic Games, so I’d be more than happy.”

USA Gymnastics has canceled its scheduled competitions this year, including the national
championships originally scheduled for next week in Fort Worth, so it remains unclear
when Biles will return to competition for the first time since last year’s world champi-
onships.

She was scheduled to compete in April at an International Gymnastics Federation World
Cup at the Olympic venue in Tokyo before it was canceled.

She couldn’t train at the Biles family-owned World Champions Centre in Montgomery
County for two months because of Gov. Greg Abbott’s order shutting down gyms. She was
able to resume training this week after Abbott allowed gyms to reopen.

Though frustrated with the yearlong delay, she told Foudy and cohost Lynn Olszowy that
she has enjoyed the chance to rest mentally and physically and to spend time with her par-
ents, Ron and Nellie Biles, and other family members.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200530/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Biles back home training but says she’d be OK with walking away.

“T’ve never had that (time) before because I’ve always been in the gym or on the go, and I
never got to relish that time,” she said.

Biles said she also struggles with the travails of USA Gymnastics, which is in Chapter 11
bankruptcy as it attempts to settle lawsuits stemming from the sexual abuse scandal per-
petrated by disgraced sports doctor Larry Nassar and the federation’s failure to prevent
Nassar’s actions.

“It’s a lot to put on myself to be the voice and the face of the sport, especially with USA
Gymnastics being where they stand. Not a fan favorite,” she said. “They need to have clar-
ity in their words and why they do what they do, and they need to set an example.

“At the end of the day, I have my one goal and so I go in the gym, drain out everything, and
do my work. And that’s the only thing I can focus on. ... Everybody wants me to speak out,
and they don’t realize how draining that is for me when I’m training.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200530/page/1/textview 2/2
