2020. 6. 17. A week into protests, demonstrators debate their next steps as cities across nation struggle to regain control

A week into protests, demonstrators debate their next steps
as cities across nation struggle to regain control

Houston Chronicle - 3 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Kim Barker and Caitlin Dickerson

MINNEAPOLIS — The unrest in America’s cities showed no signs of fading on Tuesday as
embattled police forces from Atlanta to Los Angeles struggled to reclaim the streets and
protesters debated the future of the week-old uprising.

Police and National Guard troops continued a heavy lockdown in Minneapolis, where the
death in police custody of George Floyd, a 46-year-old black man, ignited the first
protests. Gov. Tim Walz announced civil rights charges against the Minneapolis Police De-
partment and said his administration would investigate whether there had been systemic
discrimination against people of color over the past 10 years.

An estimated 10,000 people gathered peacefully outside the State Capitol as a Black Hawk
helicopter flew behind the freshly gilded dome. National Guard troops applauded, handed
out water and sometimes dropped to their knees in a show of support for the protesters.
In the nation’s capital, less than two hours before a 7 p.m. curfew went into effect, U.S.
troops positioned military vehicles across Washington as a crowd of protesters at least
twice the size of the day before gathered near the White House.

Thousands more gathered in the heart of Hollywood, Calif., Tuesday evening as police offi-
cers filed out of trucks and formed a skirmish line.

Mayor Bill de Blasio of New York extended the city’s 8 p.m. curfew through Sunday and
promised to take action against the “outsiders,” “gang members” and “common crimi-
nals” he said were responsible for looting and violence.

“T know we will overcome this. I want to be abundantly clear,” the mayor said, warning:
“We will have a tough few days.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200603/page/1/textview 4/1
