2020. 6. 17. Houston’s foster teens celebrate with graduation photo shoots.

Houston’s foster teens celebrate with graduation photo
shoots.

Officials scramble to help make their senior year special

Houston Chronicle - 1 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Gwendolyn Wu STAFF WRITER

Emily Villagomez turned briefly to the left, tilted her head up and smiled, revealing a dim-
ple in her right cheek. Her black graduation cap sat jauntily in her curly brown hair, golden
tassel swinging with every turn asked of her by a photographer.

 
  
 

 

For a brief moment Sunday in Midtown’s Baldwin Park, her senior photo shoot almost felt
normal.

Nothing has been the same for the Spring Woods High School student, who is supposed to
graduate Thursday in a socially distant outdoor ceremony at the football stadium. Her last
semester of high school has been done virtually using an online classroom software, even
as she continues to pull shifts at Pappasito’s Cantina.

Graduation is a rite of passage for American teenagers, and for the class of 2020, one of the
most important occasions of their lives has been marred by a global pandemic.

“Tt’s all just really weird,” Villagomez said, as she finished taking her pictures underneath
a canopy of live oak trees. “I’m not that excited, like it hasn’t hit me yet.”

She was one of a dozen teens in state protective custody taking their pictures Sunday
morning in the park at a photo shoot organized by the Texas Department of Family and
Protective Services and its Preparation for Adult Living (PAL) Program.

Twins Darius and Jarvis Lewis fidgeted in their matching forest green Hightower High
School gowns and “Class of 2020” T-shirts. Like Villagomez, the Lewises had spent the
rest of their senior year doing classes online and working

at McDonald’s.

In August, they’re both off to two-year colleges: Darius to Blinn College in Brenham to
study electrical engineering and hopefully play football, and Jarvis to Texas State Technical
College in Waco to study cybersecurity.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200601/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Houston’s foster teens celebrate with graduation photo shoots.

For now, their summer plans are pretty relaxed — nothing to do with virtual learning or
school.

“T plan to play games,” Darius Lewis said.

Originally, state officials had planned to host a graduation ceremony at its office near NRG
Stadium. But after COVID-19 scattered its employees and shut down many state and local
government offices, the team scrambled to get some semblance of a normal graduation in
the works for more than 100 foster kids in the Greater Houston region, said Tiffani Butler,
a spokeswoman for the Texas Department of Family and Protective Services.

Rather than the photo shoot planned at a local church before the pandemic, photographers
instead came to snap portraits at Baldwin Park, where students were greeted with with
cellophane-wrapped bags of snacks and silver graduation balloons.

Jewel-toned graduation gowns fluttered in the breeze as photographers and PAL staff
helped jam too-tight cardboard-and-fabric caps over kids’ heads. A horde of foster par-
ents joined them in the background like paparazzi, snapping shots on their smartphones.
Correy Lettsome, a senior at Klein High School, flashed his class ring at a photographer
snapping photos of his royal-blue cap and gown. Classes finished up Thursday, and he was
“happy” to be done with school, he said.

In the near future, he wants to train to be a chef, and perhaps someday, open up a restau-
rant in the Caribbean — doing it far away from the epicenters of the global pandemic and
his worries about violence against black men in the States, and the protests that have come
alongside the death of

George Floyd.

“T want to be making money and helping people,” Lettsome said.

Villagomez, the Spring Woods senior, is off to the University of Houston-Downtown this
fall, where she plans to get a head start on a degree in education or social work. Her goal is
to transfer to Sam Houston State University, her foster mom Lora Clay’s alma mater.
School has been strange in recent months, but with a fresh start at college on the horizon,
she’s hopeful something will return to normal.

“I’m pretty sure we’re making everyone proud and managing well,” she said.

“I’m pretty sure we’re making everyone proud and managing well.”

Emily Villagomez, Spring Woods High School senior

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200601/page/1/textview 2/2
