2020. 6. 17. » Local man launches #ArtForJustice Virtual Museum.

» Local man launches #ArtForJustice Virtual Museum.

Houston Chronicle - 9 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Molly Glenizer STAFF WRITER molly.glentzer@chron.com

Standing in line along with thousands of others Monday to pay his respects during the
public viewing for George Floyd, Sugar Land resident Karim Farishta was juggling calls for
a project that had hatched with lightning speed after Floyd’s killing.

 

Farishta, who recently earned a master’s degree from Harvard’s Kennedy School of
Government and will begin a new job next week with the Washington, D.C.-based Democ-
racy Alliance, organized an online, open-call art show last week aimed at parents and their
children. He envisioned families making art together while they talked through questions
such as, “What does love look like?” and “What does our world need more of ?”

He wanted to show solidarity and find ways to help the Black Lives Matter movement “like
everyone else,” he said. In particular, he wanted to encourage young people to share their
perspectives, since the future is theirs to live.

Fort Bend County Judge KP George was among those who helped him spread the word, and
by late last week Farishta was sifting through so many submitted artworks he realized he
needed a platform to share them. The response filled his heart with hope and optimism, he
said. “I have been so floored by the kindness and gratitude that’s been shared.”

On Monday, Farishta and a couple of friends launched the #ArtForJustice Virtual Museum
(invi.us/virtual-museums/). Museums and galleries around the world have launched
countless virtual tours in the age of the COVID-19 pandemic. This gallery is a 360-degree
rendering conceived by Afreen Ali and Tien Nguyen of Sugar Land, who co-founded their
architectural visualization company Invi in March. (Ali and Nguyen, both graduates of the
University of Houston’s College of Architecture, have day jobs with the firm Smith & Co.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200609/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. » Local man launches #ArtForJustice Virtual Museum.

but found time on their hands during the pandemic, along with customers in need of vir-
tual renderings.)

The Virtual Museum looks enticingly like a space visitors would want to experience in per-
son, if it were ever built.

Dramatic, stark and symbolic, the building features a square exterior of brown and black
slats, surrounded by grasses, with a reflection pool at the entrance and Houston’s skyline
in the distance. A monument to Floyd in the shape of a shardlike, raised fist rises in the
middle of the building’s central courtyard — a raw evocation in the vein of Barnett New-
man’s “Broken Obelisk.”

Through a doorway in the slats, visitors find an L-shaped gallery with a rough stone wall
at the entry (representing tough times and trouble) and a long shaft of light pouring
through a skylight that runs the length of the ceiling, with single trees planted at the bend
and the exit (suggesting growth and change).

“The whole idea was to commemorate George Floyd and Black Lives Matter,” Ali said.
“Every element was designed with them in mind.” The design also suggests changing the
cycles of history, she said — that’s why it’s entered by walking through a cut in the square,
the slats of which represent organized lines of protesters. The rock wall is about chaos; the
light about illuminating truths. “Darkness evokes feelings of distress, danger and defense-
lessness,” she added, “Yet the brightest light is found in the darkest places. ... We want the
light to be your direction.”

Dexter McCoy, another of the organizers, called the gallery “an unconventional venue to
fit the unconventional ways that we must go about seeking change and fighting for the fu-
ture our world so desperately needs.”

To date, Farishta has received more than 160 artworks from 19 U.S. states and five coun-
tries (Colombia, Bangladesh, France, India and Wales). Most are by teenagers or people in
their 20s, he said. Some were about finding peace, but fury and defiance have a place for
expression, too.

INVI’s two-room gallery is not nearly big enough to hold them all, at least yet. “We’re still
wrapping our arms around it,” Ali said. “But we plan to grow the museum.”

Seeing the huge turnout of mourners at the memorial for Floyd on Monday made Farishta
proud, too. “It was awe inspiring,” he said. “This is why I love Houston.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200609/page/1/textview 2/2
