2020. 6. 17. Families tie ribbons along route to cemetery.

Families tie ribbons along route to cemetery.

Pearland families mark heartbreak of Floyd’s funeral route with expres-
sions of sympathy

Houston Chronicle - 10 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Shelby Webb STAFF WRITER

A string of headlights flashing past the median couldn’t dull the calm Jennifer Plummer
felt draping crimson ribbon over a crepe myrtle tree Tuesday morning. Something about
the repetitive motions — making sure the ribbon lay flat on the trunk, that the knot was
tied loose enough to not wrinkle the bow — gave her moments of clarity along Cullen
Boulevard, one of the major thoroughfares in

ca

 

Pearland.

It gave her time to reflect on her 13-year-old son and the difficult conversations they’ve
had in the two weeks since a police officer smothered the life out of George Floyd 1,200
miles away. Plummer, like other black moms, worries about how the world views her son
and how those perceptions could put him in danger.

“You don’t want to tell him people think he’s a criminal walking down the street,”
Plummer said. “That’s a hard thing to tell someone.”

Plummer was among more than 30 mothers, fathers and kids who fanned out along Cullen
on Tuesday to drape crimson and gold ribbons across trees and fences. They traced the
same route

George Floyd’s family used late afternoon Tuesday to travel to his grave site, carved ina
plot next to his mother’s.

As Floyd’s procession headed toward the gravesite with a long procession, his family saw
thousands of supporters on one side of Cullen. On the other were dozens of crape myrtle
trees adorned by heartbroken mothers.

The idea to honor Floyd and his family’s pain through physical markers came from a group
of

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/2020061 0/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Families tie ribbons along route to cemetery.

mothers in Pearland, who organized online. For Davida Chatman, one of the main organiz-
ers, listening to Floyd use his dying breaths to call out for his deceased mother felt like an
ice pick to the heart.

“TI don’t know any mom in Pearland or any other area who wouldn’t stop what they were
doing and help,” Chatman said. “We wanted to do whatever we could to welcome him to
his final resting place.”

Groups began arriving at a strip mall parking lot at 5 a.m., bringing snacks, water bottles,
trash bags and bug spray. They pre-cut strands of ribbon to make them easier to hang and
brought extra tape and staplers. When 20-year-old Kate Yordy tried to run across Cullen to
retrieve more ribbon, Ginger Pearson yelled at her to wait.

“Don’t you dare go until after that last car,” said Pearson, who has several grown children
and a 6year-old grandchild.

Yordy and her 18-yearold brother, J.C., already had ant bites all over their shins and ankles
after stepping in ant hills that blended in with mulch on another median. So did Natile Far-
ris, a 40-year-old who wore a matching zebra print face mask, bandanna and a homemade
T-shirt that read “you do not have to be black to be outraged — you just have to be hu-
man.”

Farris, like Plummer, has had to have difficult conversations about how to behave around
police with her three children, especially her 15-year-old son. She’s reluctant to let him
get a driver’s license, fearing traffic stops that could go horribly wrong. Every time she
let’s him out of her sight to play with friends, pangs of fear hit her in the stomach.

“He’s just a kid who wants to go running around the neighborhood, but the whole time I’m
on pins and needles,” she said as she tied gold ribbon around the base of a tree. “We’re not
a threat because of our skin color. We all want one thing, that’s to be treated as human.
That’s all.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/2020061 0/page/1/textview 2/2
