2020. 6. 17. The music industry will hold a day of reflection.

The music industry will hold a day of reflection.

Houston Chronicle - 2 Jun 2020 - A1- By Mesfin Fekadu

NEW YORK — The music industry is planning to turn off the music and hold a day to re-
flect and implement change in response to the death of George Floyd and the killings of
other black people.

kia D — <

 

oo, ‘bee yan S.
Several top record labels organized Black Out Tuesday as violent protests erupted around
the world sparked by Floyd’s death as well as the killings of Ahmaud Arbery and Breonna
Taylor. Music-based companies Live Nation and TikTok, as well as the Recording
Academy, posted to social media that it planned to support and stand with the black com-
munity.
“On Tuesday June 2nd, Columbia Records will observe Black Out Tuesday,” the Sony label,
home to Beyonce, Bob Dylan, Adele and John Legend, said in a statement. “This is not a
day off. Instead, this is a day to reflect and figure out ways to move forward in solidarity.”
“We continue to stand with the Black community, our staff, artists, and peers in the music
industry,” the company continued. “Perhaps with the music off, we can truly listen.”
Others that have joined Black Out Tuesday include the Sony imprints RCA Records and Epic
Records; the Universal Music Group divisions Republic Records, Def Jam, UMG Nashville,
Capitol Records and Island Records; and the Warner Music Group imprints Atlantic and
Warner Records. Smaller, independent labels as well as music publishing companies and
management firms have also signed on.
In Houston, local rappers will join members of George Floyd’s family in a march from
Discovery Green, 1500 McKinney, to City Hall at 3 p.m. Tuesday.
“It’s important that we fight for justice,” said Trae Tha Truth, who was a longtime friend
of Floyd’s when he lived in Houston’s Third Ward. “We can’t stand back and watch. We

have to protect each other.”
https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200602/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. The music industry will hold a day of reflection.

Bun B, Mayor Sylvester Turner and Houston Police Chief Art Acevedo will also join the
rally.

UMG’s Interscope Geffen A&M Records said that the label home to Lady Gaga, Kendrick
Lamar and Billie Eilish would not release music this week.

“Instead, IGA will contribute to organizations that help to bail out protesters exercising
their right to peacefully assemble, aid lawyers working for systemic change and provide
assistance to charities focused on creating economic empowerment in the Black commu-
nity,” its statement read.

IGA postponed new music releases MGK, 6lack, Dylan, Jessie Ware, Smokepurp, Lil Mosey,
Billy Raffoul, Max Leone and more in coordination with their partners Alamo, LVRN, The
Darkroom, Bad Boy and more.

Musicians including Rihanna, Beyonce, Taylor Swift, Lil Nas X, Demi Lovato, Post Malone
and Harry Styles have spoken out on social media following Floyd’s death and the world-
wide riots. Some musicians were spotted alongside crowds of protesters over the weekend,
including Ariana Grande, J. Cole, Jamie Foxx, Chance the Rapper, Kehlani, Miguel, Tinashe,
Lil Yachty and Halsey, who said she was hit with a pellet and a shrapnel shell in Los Ange-
les.

LL Cool J turned to music to show his outrage and passion, posting a lengthy rap to social
media. “For 400 years you had your knees on our necks, a garden of evil with no seeds of
respect,” he rapped. “In America’s

mirror all she sees is regret, instead of letting blood live they begging for blood let.”

Jay-Z released a statement late Sunday calling for Minnesota Attorney General Keith Elli-
son to prosecute those responsible for killing Floyd, a handcuffed black man who pleaded
for air as a white police officer pressed a knee on his neck.

“I, along with an entire country in pain, call upon AG Ellison to do the right thing and
prosecute all those responsible for the murder of George Floyd to the fullest extent of the
law. This is just a first step. Iam more determined to fight for justice than any fight my
would-be oppressors may have,” Jay-Z said. “I prevail on every politician, prosecutor and
officer in the country to have the courage to do what is right. Have the courage to look at us
as humans, dads, brothers, sisters and mothers in pain and look at yourselves.”

Racial tensions were also running high after two white men were arrested in May in the
February shooting death of black jogger Arbery in Georgia, and after Louisville, Ky., police
shot Taylor to death in her home in March.

The R&B duo Chloe x Halle was originally set to release their sophomore album, “Ungodly
Hour,” on Friday. On Monday, they said they will release the album at other time. The
singers also posted a cover of the classic civil rights anthem and protest song “We Shall
Overcome” to Instagram, hoping to offer the world some positive energy.

“This week has been very heavy for all of us. We’ve been trying to, not understand, because
there’s no way to understand the terrible killings — we just have heavy hearts this week
and are just trying to do everything we can to pray and lift each other up with our voices,”
Halle said.

“With everything going on, we felt like music can be very healing, because it’s been that
way for us in kind of keeping us sane during this time,” Chloe added. As much as we could,

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200602/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. The music industry will hold a day of reflection.

we just wanted to share our gift of song to even just lift spirits for even a few seconds.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200602/page/1/textview 3/3
