2020. 6. 17. » Protests spur concem of new coronavirus outbreaks.

» Protests spur concern of new coronavirus outbreaks.

As demonstrators express frustrations, the possible spread of COVID-19
cases increase

Houston Chronicle - 1 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Roni Caryn Rabin

For the latest coverage, go online to hou

stonchronicle.com

i |

   

 

Mass protests against police brutality that have brought thousands of people out of their
homes and onto the streets in cities across America are raising the specter of new coron-
avirus outbreaks, prompting political leaders, physicians and public health experts to warn
that the crowds could cause a surge in cases.

While many political leaders affirmed the right of protesters to express themselves, they
urged the demonstrators to wear face masks and maintain social distancing, both to pro-
tect themselves and to prevent further community spread of the virus.

More than 100,000 Americans have died of COVID-19, the disease caused by the coron-
avirus. People of color have been particularly hard hit, with rates of hospitalizations and
deaths among black Americans far exceeding those of whites.

The protests in dozens of cities have been spurred most recently by the death last week of
George Floyd at the hands of police in Minneapolis. But the unrest and outrage spilling into
the streets from one city to the next also reflect the tensions arising from decades of
killings by police and the sudden losses of family and friends from the virus.

The spontaneous outpouring of protests is occurring as many states have warily begun
reopening after weeks of stay-at-home orders, with millions of Americans unemployed.
Restaurants, schools, beaches and parks are under scrutiny as the public tentatively prac-
tices new forms of social distancing.

In Los Angeles, where demonstrations led to the closing of virus testing sites Saturday,
Mayor Eric Garcetti warned that the protests could become “superspreader events,” refer-
ring to the types of gatherings, usually held in indoor settings, that can lead to an explo-
sion of secondary infections.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200601/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. » Protests spur concem of new coronavirus outbreaks.

Maryland Gov. Larry Hogan, a Republican, expressed concern that his state would see a
spike in cases in about two weeks, which is about how long it takes for symptoms to
emerge after someone is infected. Atlanta Mayor Keisha Lance Bottoms advised people
who were out protesting “to go get a COVID test this week.”

Some infectious disease experts were reassured by the fact that the protests were outdoors,
saying the open air settings could mitigate the risk of transmission. In addition, many of
the demonstrators were wearing masks, and in some places, they appeared to be avoiding
clustering too closely.

“The outdoor air dilutes the virus and reduces the infectious dose that might be out there,
and if there are breezes blowing, that further dilutes the virus in the air,” said Dr. William
Schaffner, an infectious disease expert at Vanderbilt University. “There was literally a lot
of running around, which means they’re exhaling more profoundly, but also passing each
other very quickly.”

The crowds tended to be on the younger side, he noted, and younger adults generally have
better outcomes if they become ill, though there is a risk that they could transmit the virus
to relatives and household members who may be older and more sus

ceptible.

But others were more concerned about the risk posed by the marches. Dr. Howard Markel,
a medical historian who studies pandemics, likened the protest crowds to the bond parades
held in U.S. cities such as Philadelphia and Detroit in the midst of the 1918 influenza pan-
demic, which were often followed by spikes in influenza cases.

“Yes, the protests are outside, but they are all really close to each other, and in those cases,
being outside doesn’t protect you nearly as much,” Markel said. “Public gatherings are
public gatherings — it doesn’t matter what you’ re protesting or cheering. That’s one rea-
son we’re not having large baseball games and may not have college football this fall.”
Though many protesters were wearing masks, others were not. The coronavirus is mainly
transmitted through respiratory droplets spread when people talk, cough or sneeze;
screaming and shouting slogans during a protest can accelerate the spread, Markel said.
Tear gas and pepper spray, which police have used to disperse crowds, cause people to tear
up and cough, as well as increase respiratory secretions from the eyes, nose and mouth,
further enhancing the possibility of transmission.

Police efforts to move crowds through tight urban areas can result in corralling people
closer together or penning people into tight spaces.

And emotions have been running high, Markel said. “People get lost in the moment, and
they lose awareness of who is close to them, who’s not, who’s wearing a mask, who’s not,”
he said.

The biggest concern is the one that has bedeviled infectious disease experts since the pan-
demic began, and it is the coronavirus’ secret weapon: that it can be transmitted by people
who do not display any symptoms and feel healthy enough to participate in protests.
“There are a huge number of asymptomatic carriers, and that makes it hugely risky,”
Markel said.

Dr. Ashish Jha, a professor and director of the Harvard Global Health Institute, said more
than half of coronavirus infections are spread by people who are asymptomatic, including

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200601/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. » Protests spur concem of new coronavirus outbreaks.

some who are infected but never go on to develop symptoms and others who do not yet
know they are sick.

Arresting, transporting or jailing protesters increases the potential for spreading the virus.
Jha called on protesters to refrain from violence and urged police to exercise restraint.

Dr. Scott Gottlieb, a former commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration, appearing
on CBS’ “Face The Nation” on Sunday, also predicted the protests would lead to new
“chains of transmission.”

He said social and economic inequities, including poor access to health care, discrimina-
tion in health care settings, greater reliance on public transportation and differences in
employment were all factors leading to a greater burden of COVID-19 among people of
color.

“Stopping the pandemic is going to depend on our ability to take care of our most medi-
cally and socially vulnerable,” Gottlieb said. “We absolutely need to resolve these underly-
ing problems to eliminate the risk of pandemic spreading of the epidemic.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200601/page/1/textview 3/3
