2020. 6. 17. Turner says Confederate statues to be gone by Juneteenth

Turner says Confederate statues to be gone by Juneteenth

Houston Chronicle - 12 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Jasper Scherer STAFF WRITER

The city will relocate its two Confederate statues next week, Mayor Sylvester Turner an-
nounced Thursday, following calls from activists to remove the landmarks as America
faces a national reckoning over racism.

% ® ‘o

   

 

The statues — one of which is engraved with a commemoration to “all the heroes of the
South who fought for the Principles of States Rights” — will be removed by June 19,
Turner said.

June 19 is Juneteenth, the state holiday marking the day in 1865 that slaves in Texas first
learned they had been freed under the Emancipation Proclamation two years earlier.

The mayor’s announcement came hours after U.S. Sen. John Cornyn, R-Texas, com

pared taking down Confederate statues and renaming military bases to tearing pages out
of history books.

“T don’t think we can go back and erase our history by removing statues,” Cornyn said.
“What happens next? Then somebody says you can’t teach about the Civil War or slavery in
your textbooks.”

The killing of George Floyd by police in Minneapolis has sparked nationwide calls to re-
name military bases and reignited the debate over whether to remove Confederate statues
and monuments, many of which were built by white supremacists in the early and mid-
1900s as a response to black civil rights efforts.

President Donald Trump on Wednesday rejected calls to rename military bases, saying on
Twitter: “These Monumental and very Powerful Bases have become part of a Great Ameri-
can Heritage, and a history of Winning, Victory, and Freedom.”

The Spirit of the Confederacy statue in Sam Houston Park, which was erected in 1908 by
the Robert E. Lee Chapter of the United Daughters of the Confederacy, will be moved to the
Houston Museum of African American Culture. The Houston Endowment has provided
funds to transfer the statue, according to Turner’s office.

Houston’s other Confederate monument, a marble statue of former Confederate soldier
Richard “Dick” Dowling, is expected to be moved to the Sabine Pass Battleground State
Historic Site in Port Arthur. The executive committee of the Texas Historical Commission,
which oversees the site, has voted to accept the statue. The full commission will cast a final
vote to complete the transfer at a meeting on Wednesday.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/2020061 2/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Turner says Confederate statues to be gone by Juneteenth

Turner’s announcement surprised Port Arthur Mayor Thurman Bill Bartie, who said he
would attempt to block the Dowling statue from being moved to Sabine Pass. Bartie said he
became aware of the plans when contacted by a reporter.

“T think that’s totally disrespectful for some society to make a decision for something to be
placed here during a time that we are in civil unrest,” Bartie said. “I would wish that they
would rethink that. I’m speaking for the people of Port Arthur — not just blacks, for whites
and browns and everybody.”

Turner established a task force in August 2017 to recommend what to do with the city’s
Confederate monuments. The group determined that the statues should be removed from
city property, according to a report dated March 2018. Turner said the city “began working
on a plan with partner organizations and funders to identify new locations to place the
statues” after the task force submitted the report.

“While we have been working on a plan for some time, I have decided to move forward now
considering the events of the past several weeks,” Turner said in a release Thursday. “Our
plan for relocating Confederate statues from public parks to locations more relevant to
modern times preserves history and provides an opportunity for our city to heal.”

City officials will place the statues in temporary storage until the museum and historic site
are ready to receive them, Turner said.

The move comes more than two and a half years after advocates renewed their demands
for the statues to come down in the wake of the 2017 white nationalist rally in Char-
lottesville, Va. Earlier that year, City Council renamed Dowling Street — the Third Ward
thoroughfare initially named after the same Confederate officer as the statue — to Eman-
cipation Avenue.

The change was approved on a 16-1 vote over the objections of Council member Mike
Knox, who noted Dowling’s history as a member of a group that later became the Houston
Fire Department. The former Confederate officer enlisted as a lieutenant in the Jefferson
Davis Guards and later led the defeat of an invading Union force that attempted to take
Sabine Pass, a key port for Confederate shipments during the Civil War.

Ashton Woods, the founder of Black Lives Matter Houston, said the statues should have
been removed earlier. And by moving the statues elsewhere, he said, the city is “just toss-
ing the ball to another entity instead of obliterating symbols of oppression.”

“Took way too long and they are making moves now because they don’t want any more
civil disobedience,” Woods said. “They should be destroyed.”

Turner said in a statement that moving the statues would “prevent vandalism.”

Woods was among the protesters who called for the Spirit of the Confederacy to be re-
moved in August 2017. A year later, a 26-year-old Houston man was sentenced to more
than six years in prison for attempting to blow up the Dowling statue.

Monuments across the nation have been vandalized amid protests over police violence and
the death of Floyd, the longtime Houston resident who died in Minneapolis police custody
after an officer knelt on his neck. The trend spread to Houston on Wednesday evening or
Thursday morning, when someone plastered red paint on the hands and head of a statue of
Christopher Columbus.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/2020061 2/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Turner says Confederate statues to be gone by Juneteenth

The intensified debate over Confederate monuments has played out in council chambers
and state capitols since Charlottesville, including during the last session of the Texas Leg-
islature when state Sen. Brandon Creighton, R-Conroe, authored legislation that would
have made it harder for cities to relocate Confederate monuments.

Creighton’s bill, which would have required approval of a supermajority of a city council to
move city monuments 25 years or older, passed the Senate but never received a vote in the
House.

On Thursday, Creighton said he opposed Turner’s move to relocate the statues, in part be-
cause the mayor did so without a vote of approval from City Council.

“TI don’t believe there’s a place for racism in America. But at the same time I don’t think we
should run from our history, good or bad,” Creighton said. “As a kid, I didn’t have the
money to travel to museums that were 40, 50 miles away. All I had were free parks and
public grounds to learn history by walking through those parks with my family.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/2020061 2/page/1/textview 3/3
