2020. 6. 17. State Supreme Court rules against expanded mail-in voting.

State Supreme Court rules against expanded mail-in voting.
Texas’ top court sides with AG, rules against expanding option

Houston Chronicle - 28 May 2020 - A1 - By Taylor Goldenstein STAFF WRITER

The Texas Supreme Court ruled Wednesday that lack of immunity to the new coronavirus
would not qualify voters to claim a disability and vote by mail, dealing a major victory to
Attorney General Ken Paxton, who opposes expansion of mail-in voting.

Chief Justice Nathan Hecht wrote in a majority opinion, joined by six other justices on the
nine-seat court, that fear of contracting a disease is not a physical condition and broaden-
ing the definition would render the disability category useless.

The all-Republican court said that the definition as interpreted by the Texas Democratic
Party, which had filed lawsuits in both state and federal court on this matter, would be
overly broad and enable things like “being too tired to drive to a polling place” to count as
a physical condition.

“It would swallow the other categories of voters eligible for mailin voting,” the opinion
states. “We agree, of course, that a voter can take into consideration aspects of his health
and his health history that are physical conditions in deciding whether, under the circum-
stances, to apply to vote by mail because of disability. We disagree that lack of immunity,
by itself, is one of them.”

Texas is one of the few states that still require voters younger than 65 to have an excuse to
cast a ballot by mail, such as being disabled, out of the county during the election period or
confined in jail. Fewer than 7 percent of Texas voters mailed in ballots in 2018, but county
clerks in some of the state’s largest counties have said they’re seeing higher levels of in-
terest since the pandemic.

A similar case launched by the party will continue in federal

court and now sits before the 5th Circuit Court of Appeals. The case is very likely to land in
front of the U.S. Supreme Court.

“I applaud the Texas Supreme Court for ruling that certain election officials’ definition of
‘disability’ does not trump that of the Legislature, which has determined that widespread
mail-in balloting carries unacceptable risks of corruption and fraud,” Paxton, a Republi-
can, said in a statement Wednesday.

“Election officials have a duty to reject mail-in ballot applications from voters who are not
entitled to vote by mail. In-person voting is the surest way to maintain the integrity of our
elections, prevent voter fraud and guarantee that every voter is who they claim to be.”

The battle in Texas is one of many playing out across the country as Democrats and civil
rights groups seek to expand voting access, especially during a pandemic that threatens to
hamper turnout. Other states, including some with Republican-controlled legislatures,
such as South Carolina, Kentucky and West Virginia, have moved to expand mail-in voting
amid the health crisis.

President Donald Trump and other top Republicans have railed against those moves,
claiming it would lead to more instances of voter fraud, though studies have shown that

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200528/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. State Supreme Court rules against expanded mail-in voting.

voter fraud, including mail-in fraud, is extremely rare.

Texas’ primary runoff elections are set for July 14, pushed back from May because of the
pandemic, and early voting begins June 29. Such elections normally draw low turnout, but
the resolution to the mail-in ballot suit could have big implications for the November elec-
tion, which is expected to draw large crowds.

The highest civil court in the state issued the opinion Wednesday in response to a request
by Paxton to order county clerks in five Texas counties to abide by his interpretation of the
law and not accept mail-in applications from voters whose only reason was fear of con-
tracting COVID-19.

The court declined that request Wednesday, saying the justices believed their opinion
would be sufficient clarification and that they were “confident that election officials will
comply.”

Texas Democratic Party Chair Gilberto Hinojosa expressed his disappointment with the
decision and said Texans’ safety at the polls depends on the federal case.

“Now, it is up to the federal court to ensure basic constitutional rights still exist in Texas
and ensure that Texans have a right to vote safely and not put their health at risk,” Hino-
josa said in a statement.

The decision also comes a day after the Secretary of State’s office released guidance with
its minimum recommended health protocols for Texas voters. Recommendations included
voters maintaining 6 feet of distance between each other at polling locations, bringing
their own pen, pencil or stylus for checking in to vote and marking a ballot, as well as their
own hand sanitizer, and staying home or voting curbside if possible COVID-19 symptoms
arise.

While the guidance recommended voters wear a face mask, it warned that an election judge
unable to determine a voter’s identity may ask for it to be removed.

Voters age 65 and up who are at a higher risk of serious complications from COVID-19
should consider voting by mail, the guidance said.

Election workers should consider providing markings for people standing in line delineat-
ing 6 feet of separation, making hand sanitizer and disinfecting wipes available and regu-
larly cleaning surfaces that are frequently touched.

Justice Debra Lehrmann had announced last week that she and her husband were positive
for COVID-19. Lerhmann joined the majority opinion Wednesday.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200528/page/1/textview 2/2
