2020. 6. 17. TEA tells districts to heed DeVos

TEA tells districts to heed DeVos
Public schools stand to lose millions in aid to private institutions

Houston Chronicle - 30 May 2020 - A1 - By Jacob Carpenter STAFF WRITER

Texas Education Agency officials are advising school districts to follow controversial fed-
eral guidance on a key section of the coronavirus relief law, which some education advo-
cates believe will result in private schools getting millions of dollars more at the expense
of public schools.

   

The guidance, issued late last month by U.S. Education Secretary Betsy DeVos’ administra-
tion, delivers added financial support from the $2 trillion Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Eco-
nomic Security Act to private schools across Texas, many of which are expecting to lose
students and money as families tighten their budgets during the coronavirus pandemic.
However, some public school leaders believe that DeVos, a strong supporter of private
schools, is misinterpreting the coronavirus relief law to their detriment. While the ulti-
mate impact of the guidance on Texas schools is not known, public schools likely stand to
lose and private schools stand to gain tens of millions of dollars.

In a statement, TEA officials said the agency “plans to follow the guidance” from DeVos’
administration. Education leaders in at least three states — Indiana, Maine and Pennsyl-
vania — have advised their school districts to disregard the guidance or questioned federal
officials on their interpretation.

“Until, and if, Congress or the federal courts require that the U.S. Department of Education
change its present guidance, Texas will follow that guidance, in order to ensure that criti-
cally needed federal funds are not jeopardized through noncompliance,” a TEA spokesman
said.

The dust-up centers on whether private schools’ share of $13 billion in federal relief funds
— including $1.3 billion allocated to Texas — should be based on the number of low-in-
come students they enroll or the total number of

students they serve.

The CARES Act states that relief funds should be distributed “in the same manner” that
money is allocated to public and private schools through Title I, a federal program that
provides financial support to schools serving low-income students. Under the existing
process, public school districts receive Title I funding and provide a portion of the money
to private schools for secular services based on their number of low-income students.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200530/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. TEA tells districts to heed DeVos

DeVos’ administration, however, ruled late last month that CARES Act funding should flow
to private schools based on their total number of students. In a letter sent last week to the
Council of Chief State School Officers, DeVos wrote that her critics’ interpretation of the
law “would improperly discriminate against an entire class of children.”

“A growing list of nonpublic schools have announced they will not be able to reopen, and
those closures are concentrated in low-income and middle-class communities,” DeVos
wrote. “I would encourage educators everywhere to be as concerned about those students
and teachers as they are with those in public schools.”

Lawmakers’ rebuke

DeVos’ interpretation has drawn rebukes in recent weeks from the chairmen of the U.S.
House and Senate education committees, who are a Democrat and Republican, respec-
tively. Sen. Lamar Alexander, RTenn., told reporters last week that he believed “most of
Congress was expecting” the at-issue funds would be allocated “in the same way we dis-
tribute Title I money.”

Education Department officials did not respond to written questions about the dispute.
Texas public schools, which take in tens of billions of dollars annually, typically provide a
relatively meager amount of money — about $13.2 million in 2018-19 — to private schools
for services supporting low-income students. The largest allocation, $3 million, came
from Houston Independent School District, whose administrators said they still are
gathering information about the CARES Act and awaiting further TEA guidance.

The potential increase in private school support remains to be seen, largely because it is
unknown how many private schools will seek CARES Act funds. Even under the DeVos ad-
ministration’s guidance, private schools stand to receive only a fraction of Texas’ federal
relief funds, given that their enrollment — nearly 250,000 students — is dwarfed by the
5.5 million children in public schools.

‘Significant’ help

Still, the money could help buoy private schools facing enrollment and tuition losses.
Laura Colangelo, executive director of the Texas Private Schools Association, said a survey
of 320 member schools in recent days found that they expected enrollment to drop 10 per-
cent to 15 percent for the upcoming school year. In addition, about 30 school leaders said
they were “likely or very likely to close” by August — a fate already realized at four small
Catholic schools in the Houston area.

“It’s significant to us for sure,” Colangelo said of the CARES Act funding. “It could mean
the difference between schools staying open or not.”

For the 59 schools under the Archdiocese of Galveston-Houston Catholic schools accredi-
tation umbrella, the federal relief funding would create “huge possibilities” to provide tu-
toring for students, training for teachers and cleaning supplies to keep schools safe, Su-
perintendent Debra Haney said. The archdiocese expects to see a 10 percent to 20 percent
decline in enrollment across its campuses, with some schools possibly experiencing
greater losses, she said.

“We are encouraging our schools to seek their fair share of the equitable services that
should be provided to them through the CARES Act,” Haney said in an email. “As taxpay-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200530/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. TEA tells districts to heed DeVos

ers, our families are entitled to have students benefit from the dollars received by the local
education agency.”

Some public school advocates, however, say DeVos’ interpretation of the law improperly
directs money away from lowerincome students who will need the most support once
campuses reopen.

“Hopefully, there’s going to be a fix there, either through Congress or the courts, that
gives much more clear guidance,” said Kevin Brown, executive director of the Texas Asso-
ciation of School Administrators. “I think the legislation is very confusing, and hopefully it
can be cleaned up and clarified quickly.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200530/page/1/textview 3/3
