2020. 6. 17. Rockets coach on winning NBA title: ‘Why not us?’

Rockets coach on winning NBA title: ‘Why not us?’

Houston Chronicle - 9 Jun 2020 - A1 - BRIAN T. SMITH

Mike D’ Antoni was walking and talking.

   

Walking during a sunny and increasingly hot Saturday morning, with the 69-year-old
Rockets coach getting in another round of daily exercise.

Talking about everything. The announcement that he was on the verge of finally getting
his veteran-laden NBA team back after an unprecedented layoff that began March 11 and
will last until July. The excitement that a slimmed-down James Harden, healthy Eric Gor-
don and rested P.J. Tucker represent for the renewed Rockets. Three months of personal
and professional change during the time of the coronavirus pandemic.

“T don’t think there’s anything comparable (to this),” D’Antoni said. “And that’s one
thing that we kind of hit on with the players. That, hey, this is unique. This is something
that you’ll remember. No one has ever done this — and hopefully no one will do it again. So
this is something very unique and very challenging. And the thing that’s going to be inter-
esting here is just watch who can really perform.”

D’Antoni is one of the NBA’s best, most respected and most creative coaches since the be-
ginning of our new millennium. He’s 213-97 in the regular season since taking over the
Rockets in May 2016, posting a fantastic .687 winning percentage while dealing with own-
ership change, the Chris Paul-for-Russell Westbrook blockbuster trade and the rise/fall of
the Golden State Warriors’ dynasty.

D’ Antoni also entered this season knowing it could be his last with the Rockets (40-24),
who battled inconsistency since last October and continued to frustrate heading into a sus-
pended calendar: In their last 13 games, they lost two, won six consecutive contests, lost
four straight and finished it off by barely beating a rebuilding team.

Now the coach with a 668-523 all-time record is set to lead his current team into the
NBA’s protective bubble in Orlando, Fla., with his future and a world championship on the
line.

“We're still knocking on the door, and we feel like, yeah, why not us?” D’ Antoni said.

If someone eventually films a big-budget movie or makes a 10-part documentary about
the league’s 2019-20 season, D’Antoni will be a perfect candidate for a leading role.

He strengthened alreadystrong relationships with his athletes during the extended break.
He consistently talked to his superstars and role players. But he also remained quiet and

listened.
https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200609/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Rockets coach on winning NBA title: ‘Why not us?’

“A lot of it is self-reflection. A lot of it is how can I better myself ?” D’ Antoni said. “How
can I do what needs to be done or what I’m preaching and hopefully be a better person for
it? And it starts there. If I can change myself enough just to better myself, then it will help
the relationships and help everything — my coaching. It helps the Houston Rockets and, in
turn, helps everybody. So it starts there, and listening is a big part of it. But then at a cer-
tain point, not only listen but stand up and just don’t let things slide.”

Videos and photos of a significantly slimmer Harden have been making the social-media
rounds as the NBA prepares to return. D’Antoni said the league’s leading scorer is already
prepoared for the hardwood-under-a-microscope challenge that awaits.

“He loves to play. Probably the worst thing you can do is take basketball away from him,”
D’ Antoni said. “He has used this to recharge, to get in better shape, and still always has
that incredible fire that will lead him to be one of the best in the game, which he is. Yeah,
I’m excited about that.”

Harden’s outdoor and indoor workouts have helped fill the NBA’s on-court Twitter void
during the break.

But the largest lingering question for D’Antoni’s team: Will the 2019-20 Rockets still be
devoted to small ball when they resume action in Orlando?

“It’s pretty evident we’ve gone all in,” D’Antoni said with a laugh. “It’s like, no, we’re in.
It’s changed a little bit, only in that it gives us time to go through a training camp, more or
less — about the same time, actually, so a training camp. And getting on the same page as
good as we can. We were confident even before that we were on the right track.

“Now, being on the right track and winning it all, sometimes they’re different. But I think
this gives us the best chance that we can do it, and now that we’re able to expand the play-
book and get people on the same page ... it’s going to come down to can we maximize what
we have, and is it enough? You don’t know until you get in the competition.”

D’ Antoni joked that he’s in his best physical shape in 20 years. And that, during his playing
days, he was a better player in practice than in games.

The NBA’s temporary stage will be unlike anything devoted fans of The Association have
seen. The league’s biggest stars playing for keeps inside nearempty facilities, with playoff
victories, personal legacies and world championship rings on the line. The power and
prestige of the NBA Finals ... combining the look of a summer pick-up game with the heat
of a fullcourt preseason practice.

The Rockets were the league’s only team to completely change course midseason. After
another monumental in-season change, D’ Antoni believes he’s about to get the best from
Harden, Westbrook and Co. in the bubble near Disney World.

“That will be very intriguing to watch,” D’Antoni said. “As players, OK, this is not what we
asked for. But you know what? This can be super, and you’ve got to have that mindset. ...
It’s really just concentrating on basketball.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200609/page/1/textview 2/2
