2020. 6. 17. Turner to launch review of HPD policies

Turner to launch review of HPD policies

In wake of Floyd protests, task force will seek to ensure police accountabil-
ity, transparency

Houston Chronicle - 6 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Dylan McGuinness STAFF WRITER

Mayor Sylvester Turner plans to appoint a task force to review Houston Police Department
policies amid growing calls for reform following nationwide protests over the death of for-

mer Houston resident George Floyd in Minneapolis police custody.

  

parency. He announced the task force Thursday night during an hourlong ABC13 town hall
on police and community relations.

“It’s so important to hold onto the trust between the community and police because the
two have to work together, not be against one another,” Turner said. “Establishing that
confidence and that trust is a critical component. That’s why it’s important for all of us to
listen, to listen to what people are saying, to listen to the reforms that people want to see
put in place, and then to act on those reforms. And we’re going to seek to do that.”

It was not clear Friday when people would be appointed or

when the task force would meet.

The mayor’s announcement came as activists and other public officials have called for
changes in Houston, including giving the city’s Independent Police Oversight Board sub-
poena power to conduct its own investigations. The board widely is seen as weak because it
only reviews internal affairs investigations by HPD.

New measures

Some council members have proposed amendments to the city budget — set for debate
and a possible vote Wednesday — to enact more extensive changes, though it did not ap-
pear Friday that any measure had garnered a consensus.

Conversations about potential reforms began before Floyd’s death, Councilwoman Tiffany
Thomas said. After a string of six fatal police shootings here in Houston, several council

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200606/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Turner to launch review of HPD policies

members met privately with Police Chief Art Acevedo.

Thomas said she would favor strengthening the oversight board; ensuring there are public
records of complaints made by both citizens and officers against their colleagues; and cre-
ating some sort of research arm to parse data to illuminate other options.

Councilman Ed Pollard has offered a budget amendment to create an online database
where residents can view complaints made to the police department. Pollard said the in-
formation would boost transparency and give the public and policymakers data to inform
reforms. His amendment calls for building off an existing platform, called Project Com-
port, that is already used in other cities.

Councilwoman Letitia Plummer has proposed the furthest-reaching budget amendment. It
would eliminate 199 vacant HPD positions and one of five planned police cadet classes.
Plummer seeks to redirect about $11.8 million of the police funding toward reforms, in-
cluding subpoena-empowered oversight board probes; increased spending on re-entry
and My Brother’s Keeper programs; and creation of a mental health unit to respond to
some low-risk calls.

It is unclear how many council members are willing to sign onto Plummer’s plan, espe-
cially after Turner explicitly rejected reduced spending on police.

In a CNN appearance Thursday, Turner argued the department is stretched thin. Houston
has roughly 5,300 officers covering 665 square miles. Chicago has about 12,000 officers for
275 square miles, he said.

“In our city, we need more police officers,” Turner said. “What people want and what they
deserve is good policing.”

Turner’s proposal would boost spending on police from $911 million to $930 million. Most
of that increase is devoted to paying personnel. Officers are getting a 3 percent raise under
a labor contract reached in 2018.

Councilman Mike Knox, the only former police officer on council, said HPD already does
many of the things included in calls for reform.

The department has banned chokeholds for decades, equips every officer with body cam-
eras and conducts regular de-escalation and cultural training. Complaints within the
department — filed by officers against other officers — outnumber the public complaints
the department receives, Knox said.

“There’s no policeman on this planet, that I’m aware of, that thinks what happened in
Minnesota was appropriate ... and (the officer) is going to probably go to prison, which is
where he belongs,” Knox said. “But the fact of the matter is, the Houston Police Depart-
ment had nothing to do with that. Our policies, and our department, are pretty good. We
can always look to improve.”

Floyd, who grew up in Third Ward, was killed in Minneapolis police custody last week after
an officer knelt on his neck for nearly nine minutes. That officer faces murder and man-
slaughter charges; three other officers at the scene — who did not intervene — also face
charges.

Floyd’s death sparked protests in all 50 states and a national dialogue about policing and
communities of color.

‘Many George Floyds’

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200606/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Turner to launch review of HPD policies

Councilwoman Carolyn EvansShabazz — who represents the district where Floyd grew up
and is a graduate of Jack Yates High School, his alma mater — said she supports a stronger
review board and increased officer training, and she said she thinks those measures fur-
ther the interests of law enforcement, as well.

“People need to know that someone else in the community, a representative group, is
looking at these cases,” Evans-Shabazz said. “The unfortunate thing is there are many
George Floyds, and as much as we can, we need to prevent more George Floyds.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200606/page/1/textview 3/3
