2020. 6. 17. NBA considers array of formats to finish out the season.

NBA considers array of formats to finish out the season.

Houston Chronicle - 27 May 2020 - A1 - By Jonathan Feigen STAFF WRITER

One way or another, the NBA wants to complete its 2019-20 season, and the league’s re-

turn could become official in the coming days or perhaps weeks.

   

The locale of remaining games seems certain to be the ESPN Wide World of Sports Com-
plex outside Orlando, Fla.

The format, however, remains to be determined.

As momentum builds toward a return to the court, options are likely to be presented at a
Board of Governors meeting Friday, and decisions could come relatively quickly. There is a
general managers meeting scheduled for Thursday.

There has been no lack of lobbying efforts for weeks, especially this week. NBA commis-
sioner Adam Silver has been consistent in saying all ideas were welcome. Some are more
viable now that the league seems headed for a single-site scenario with games played si-
multaneously in the various facilities available within one campus-like community.

The league polled GMs to deter

mine their preferences regarding the schedule and the playoffs. Silver has been in frequent
communication with the players association. Union executive director Michele Roberts has
held virtual meetings with members. A large variety of committees has been weighing in.
There is an expectation the league will ramp up workouts in individual markets next
month, initially with more individual training that is now voluntary and then with the
start of practices before teams begin practicing at the Disney complex in Florida.

The ways to complete the season, however, come with an even greater variety of pluses
and minuses to consider.

Traditional

The league could bring all 30 teams back for a modified regularseason schedule. That
would be the most familiar format. Financially, it could be beneficial because the contracts
with many regional sports networks require 70 games (teams played from 64 to 67 games
before the coronavirus shutdown). The league might like the idea that, in a season with so
much turned upside down, something would be uncomplicated in its restart.

But players on teams with little or no chance to make the playoffs would have little reason
to compete in a handful of regular-season games, and it would take a large commitment to

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200527/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. NBA considers array of formats to finish out the season.

prepare to play. It would take weeks of practices and time on the road just to play a small
number of meaningless games.

Teams competing for the final playoff spots would have an advantage if they play more of
those teams simply finishing out the season. Franchises presently seeded among the top
eight in each conference could see their playoff positioning hurt.

There are some lottery-bound teams, however, that look at playing in July as helpful for
rebuilding, especially in a year with no summer league. Several have argued it

could be difficult, and even unfair, to be excluded from any competition until December,
when the 2020-21 season could begin.

There is also an understanding that more games, even with teams that would play only a
short regular-season schedule before going home, would help reduce some of the damage
in a season that has seen a dramatic loss of revenue.

Because the NBA virtually splits basketball-related income with players, there is an under-
standing among players that even if they are not playing for a chance at a championship,
they would be playing for something.

Straight to playoffs

Momentum has been building toward giving up on the regular season to move directly to
the postseason. Bringing fewer people into the single-site environment would be safer. It
would allow teams with no realistic hope to make the playoffs to skip meaningless games.
It also would seem unfair to teams fighting for the final playoff spots to no longer have
that chance. In the Western Conference, ninth-place Portland and 10th-place New Orleans
had a much easier schedule remaining than Memphis, the eighth seed when the season
was halted.

The consensus among teams, according to individuals familiar with talks so far, is to play
some games before the postseason. Many have argued that scrimmages or exhibition
games would not be enough to prepare. There is concern, several individuals said, that as
different as games will look with no fans in attendance, it would hurt even more if the
quality of postseason play without some preparation games looks more like the opening of
a season than at least the middle of it.

Pre-playoffs tournament

The idea of replacing the remainder of the regular season with a tournament has been pro-
posed and considered, two individuals with knowledge of discussions said, but there does
not seem to be much momentum for the idea.

The idea is similar to the in-season tournament Silver has discussed for a future season. It
would allow teams to prepare for the postseason in a more meaningful way than a small
number of regular-season games unlikely to change much about the seeding or most of
the postseason participants.

The overall feeling, however, seems to be that little value would be placed on the champi-
onship of a pre-playoffs tournament and that this is not the right time to employ a new
concept.

Group stage

There is considerable support for replacing the opening round of the playoffs with group
play similar to international tournaments.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200527/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. NBA considers array of formats to finish out the season.

There is concern than any change from the familiar postseason format would add to the
sense that the 2019-20 season would not produce a “real” champion. There is a faction
that believes the league should keep things as close to the norm as possible. There has been
concern that the group-play format could take away much of the reward for success in the
games played before the league shut down in March.

Group play would allow teams on the playoff bubble to have a chance. The league’s top 20
teams could be divided into four groups of five, each playing the other members of its
group in a roundrobin schedule, with the top two teams in each group advancing to the
second round of the playoffs.

The playoffs could then proceed with three rounds of customary best-of-seven series.
Teams that get off to slow starts after the long shutdown could find themselves out of the
playoffs quickly, however, which some of the top teams might consider unfair after play-
ing well for five months.

Play-in games

A regular-season schedule of five to seven games might seem unfair to the four Western
Conference

teams — Portland, New Orleans, Sacramento and San Antonio — within four games of the
final playoff spot. Washington was 51/2 games behind Orlando for the final Eastern Confer-
ence spot.

A play-in tournament could give those teams a chance to play their way into the postsea-
son, but it would be difficult to determine how many teams to include.

In the Eastern Conference, seventh-seeded Brooklyn is just a half game in front of the
eighth seed. But in the West, Dallas is seven games in front of the eighth seed, 101/2 ahead
of the teams trying to move into the playoff brackets. With the Mavericks closer to second
than ninth, it would seem unfair to have them compete just to be in the playoffs.

Sweet 16

The hesitation about seeding playoff teams one through 16 with no consideration of con-
ferences has been less about tradition and more about the travel that could be required.
With single-site travel limited to the journey from hotel to arena, that would no longer be
a consideration.

There is some pushback on doing anything outside the norm that can be controlled, but
there is also a sense among many that this would be the time to try it. And there is at least
one aspect that would be familiar.

If the current standings remain unchanged, the Rockets would face the Jazz, as usual, in
the noconference format.

In the traditional format, the Rockets would be the sixth seed in the West and line up to
play the Nuggets. There could be precedent they would like about that. They are the only
team to win a championship as a sixth seed (in 1995). The last time they played the
Nuggets in the postseason, in 1986, they advanced to the NBA Finals.

None of that is likely to be part of the NBA’s decision-making. But there still have been
ample lobbying efforts for Silver and many others to weigh as the league seeks to salvage
its season.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200527/page/1/textview 3/3
