2020. 6. 17. Pandemic makes today’s anniversary one of loneliest.

Pandemic makes today’s anniversary one of loneliest.

Houston Chronicle - 6 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Raf Casert

SAINT-LAURENT-SUR-MER, France — At least the dead will always be there.

 

All too many have been, for 76 years since that fateful June 6 on this nation’s Normandy
beaches, when Allied troops in 1944 turned the course of World War II and went on to de-
feat fascism in Europe in one of the most remarkable feats in military history.

Forgotten they will never be. Revered, yes. But Saturday’s anniversary will be one of the
loneliest remembrances ever, as the coronavirus pandemic is keeping almost everyone
away — from government leaders to frail veterans who might not get another chance for a
final farewell to their unlucky comrades.

Rain and wind are also forecast, after weeks of warm, sunny weather.

“TI miss the others,” said Charles Shay, who as a U.S. Army medic was in the first wave of
soldiers to wade ashore at Omaha Beach under relentless fire on D-Day.

Shay, 95, lives in France, close to the beach where he and so many others landed in 1944.
He knows of no U.S. veterans making the trip overseas to observe D-Day this year.

“T guess I will be alone here this year,” Shay said before he performed a Native American
ritual to honor his comrades by spreading the smoke of burning white sage into the winds
lashing the Normandy coast Friday.

The eerie atmosphere touches the French as well as Americans.

“The sadness is almost too much, because there is no one,” local guide Adeline James said.
“Plus you have their stories. The history is sad, and it’s even more overwhelming now be-
tween the weather, the (virus) situation and, and, and.”

The locals in this northwestern part of France have come out year after year to show their
gratitude for the soldiers from the U.S., Britain, Canada and other countries who liberated
them from Adolf Hitler’s Nazi forces.

Despite the lack of international crowds, David Pottier still went out to raise American
flags in the village of Mosles, population 356, which was liberated by Allied troops the day
after the landing on five Normandy beachheads.

In a forlorn scene, a gardener tended to the parched grass around the small monument for
the war dead, while Pottier, the mayor, was getting the French tricolor to flutter next to
the Stars and Stripes.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200606/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Pandemic makes today’s anniversary one of loneliest.

“We have to recognize that they came to die in a foreign land,” Pottier said. “We miss the
Gls,” he said of the U.S. soldiers.

The pandemic has wreaked havoc across the world, infecting 6.6 million people, killing
over 391,000 and devastating economies. It poses a particular threat to the elderly — such
as the surviving D-Day veterans who are in their late 90s or older.

It has also affected the younger generations who turn out every year to mark the occasion.
Most have been barred from traveling to the coasts of Normandy.

Some 160,000 soldiers made the perilous crossing from England that day in atrocious con-
ditions, storming dunes they knew were heavily defended by German troops.

Somehow, they succeeded. Yet they left a trail of thousands of casualties who have been
mourned for generations since.

Last year stood out, with President Donald Trump joining French President Emmanuel
Macron at the American cemetery in Colleville-sur-Mer, on a bluff overlooking Omaha
Beach. A smattering of veterans were honored with the highest accolades. All across the
beaches of Normandy, tens of thousands came from across the globe to pay their respects
to the dead and laud the surviving soldiers.

The acrid smell of wartime-era jeep exhaust fumes and the rumble of old tanks filled the
air as parades of vintages vehicles went from village to village. The tiny roads between the
dunes, hedges and apple orchards were clogged for hours, if not days.

Heading into the D-Day remembrance weekend this year, only the salty brine coming off
the ocean on Omaha Beach hits the nostrils, the shrieks of seagulls pierce the ears and a
sense of desolation hangs across the region’s country roads.

“Last year, this place was full with jeeps, trucks, people dressed up as soldiers,” said Eric
Angely, who sat on a seawall wearing a World War II uniform after taking his restored U.S.
Army jeep out for a ride.

“This year, there is nothing. It’s just me now, my dog and my jeep,” the local Frenchman
said.

Three-quarters of a century and the horrific wartime slaughter of DDay help put things in
perspective. Someday, the COVID-19 pandemic, too, will pass, and people will turn out to
remember both events that shook the world.

“We don’t have a short memory around here,” Pottier said with a wistful smile.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200606/page/1/textview 2/2
