2020. 6. 17. County jail population creeping back to pre-pandemic capacity.

County jail population creeping back to pre-pandemic capac-
ity.

Officials warn that with an influx of inmates expected during summer, ‘cri-
sis’ lies ahead

Houston Chronicle - 13 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Gabrielle Banks and Samantha Ketterer STAFF WRITER

The Harris County Jail population has been steadily rising since late April and is now ap-
proaching its pre-pandemic capacity despite early efforts to curb crowding, according to
the sheriff ’s office.

~~ —

   
 

mi
es . I
Ts
iz
ayn Pe CL)
FE " Cees eee Ly =

With an influx of inmates expected during the summer months, the jail is facing a “serious
crisis,” according to a report Tuesday that a sheriff ’s representative classified as “sober-
ing.”

The update about the jail population came in a study the county commissioned from the
Justice Management Institute, a Virginiabased nonprofit that works with government
agencies to make their courts and jails more efficient.

“The justice system has been struggling since Hurricane Harvey,” Tom Eberly, the organi-
zation’s program director announced in a video testimony before Harris County Commis-
sioner’s Court. “Now with the COVID-19 pandemic, the justice system is on the verge of
collapse in your county.”

If the anticipated pace of bookings follows previous patterns, the county could reach
10,000 inmates by Labor Day, according to the nonprofit group’s calculations. And the
courts were already backed up before the virus, officials said.

Jason Spencer, spokesman for the Harris County Sheriff ’s Office, said his boss is very con-
cerned about the predictions.

“Bookings are outpacing releases, and even before the pandemic the courts hadn’t gotten
up to their pre-Harvey level of operation,” Spencer said. “Those numbers reveal what
we’ve been saying for a year now.”

When the novel coronavirus hit the Houston region in March, Sheriff Ed Gonzalez, County
Judge Lina Hidalgo and a crew of bail lawyers — all criminal justice reformers — pressed
for releases to facilitate social distancing. Their efforts prompted legal sparring with law
enforcement hardliners, resulting in marginal progress. The governor, county judge and
state, federal and appellate judges issued contradictory orders. Roughly 300 inmates left

the jail under various orders.
https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200613/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. County jail population creeping back to pre-pandemic capacity.

The number of people inside the jail crept downward through late April, then began to
notch up again.

The jail, which has the second largest capacity in the country, was housing 8,117 inmates
as of Friday afternoon. That was up from 7,363 at a recent low point on April 17, according
to Jay Jenkins, of the Texas Criminal Justice Commission. While the three-building down-
town facility can accommo

date about 10,500 people, outsourcing the overflow to nearby jails may be difficult if the
numbers continue to increase because other facilities are facing the same capacity issues
with the virus, officials said.

The lawyers challenging the county’s bail system, who lost a bid for an injunction to order
coronavirus releases, said thousands of felony defendants are stuck at the jail awaiting
trial simply because they can’t pay cash bail. The vast majority of the population is made
up of up pretrial felony detainees.

“Their constitutional rights are being violated, and their health and safety are being jeop-
ardized by COVID-19, which is rampant at the jail,” said Neal Manne, of Susman Godfrey,
who works pro bono on the bail cases. “Though Sheriff Gonzales wants to solve the prob-
lem, he can’t solve it by himself. No one else is doing anything other than talking about it,
week after week, month after month, as COVID-19 surges.”

In the meantime, coronavirus infections have continued to increase, with 993 inmates
testing positive since the start of the pandemic.

The pandemic has cramped the jail’s holding capacity, which changes day to day depend-
ing upon how many people are quarantined and how much the jail staff must space them
out on the cell blocks to help prevent the spread of the virus. For example, 835 inmates
who have had the virus and remain in custody have now recovered. But 778 are being kept
in observational quarantine, meaning they are not showing symptoms, but they may have
been exposed to COVID-19.

Another 600-plus people are housed in what the jail calls “buffer quarantine” because
they are new to the jail, according to the sheriff’s office. And nearly 300 convicted inmates
are ready to be transferred to state prison but Texas Department of Criminal Justice is not
accepting them during the pandemic.

Meanwhile, the jail population is increasing by 115 inmates per week and as of May 1, the
county had more than 36,000 pending felony cases, Eberly said. If no new felony arrests
were made in the coming months, it would still take 13 months to dispose of the backlog,
he said.

However, if the system keeps shuffling along as is, it will take 41/2 years to catch up, the
study found.

Statewide, jail populations also decreased in the first months of the pandemic and have
begun rising going into the summer, a normal trend outside of the unusual circumstances
this year, said Brandon Wood, executive director of the Texas Commission on Jail Stan-
dards.

Population spikes at county jails largely stem from backlogs in the courts, he said.

“It’s going to be incumbent on Harris County to manage its jail population properly,”
Wood said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200613/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. County jail population creeping back to pre-pandemic capacity.

County officials recently agreed to examine options for adding hundreds of beds by con-
verting recreation areas at the jail into housing. Officials were also looking into repurpos-
ing mothballed county and city facilities that are built for detained populations, including
the city’s Mykawa facility near Hobby Airport and “Little Baker,” a portion of the county
jail that flooded during Hurricane Harvey.

There is one other outlet that criminal justice officials look to ease crowding.

Officials at the jail routinely provide lists to judges of people potentially eligible for release
on bond. District Attorney’s officials said they are making use of those lists to recommend
releases.

“For the past several weeks, prosecutors have reviewed the names of those held in jail after
being arrested by police, because we believe the jail should be used only to hold only those
who are too much of a danger to be released,” said Dane Schiller, spokesman for Harris
County District Attorney Kim Ogg. “While it is up to judges in every instance to decide
which defendants should be released and under what conditions, prosecutors have a duty
to notify judges of their concerns, such as a defendant with a history of violence or bail
jumping.”

For the time being, the jail is below its functioning capacity, said Spencer, spokesman for
the sheriff.

“We still have wiggle room and there’s time to take action,” he said. “It needs to be ad-
dressed sooner rather than later.”

He added, “The county needs to figure out a way to get courts up and running and cases
heard and adjudicated. The solutions to this problem are not in our hands at the sheriff ’s
office. They’re in the hands of everyone who is a part of the Harris County Criminal Justice
System.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200613/page/1/textview 3/3
