2020. 6. 17. » Virus scales down Memorial Day ceremony.

» Virus scales down Memorial Day ceremony.

NATIONAL CEMETERY: Normally packed event is limited to just a small
crowd

Houston Chronicle - 26 May 2020 - A‘ - By Brittany Britto STAFF WRITER

Jeff Brownsberger had attended the Houston National Cemetery’s annual Memorial Day
ceremony every year for the past decade, and so Monday he rose early again, in hopes of
securing a good spot to view the wreath laying.

. v2 WTR
“

  

When he arrived at 6 a.m., however, things were different. The cemetery grounds were
quiet. The horseshoe-shaped memorial building where the ceremony is held each year was
largely empty.

“Usually, this place is packed by the thousands,” said Brownsberger, whose father, an
Army veteran, and mother are both buried at the cemetery.

At Houston National and cemeteries around the country, low-key Memorial Day cere-
monies were held to comply with crowd restrictions put in place due to the COVID-19 pan-
demic, which has claimed lives of nearly 100,000 people in the United States so far.
Houston National Cemetery typically has a robust program that draws more than a thou-
sand people. Instead, it hosted a roughly 40-minute ceremony that included the singing of
the national anthem, a prayer, the wreath presentation and a rifle salute. Attendance was
restricted to media and a select group of officials and veterans in order to adhere to Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention guidelines, according to a news release.

Cemetery director Roy Luera said guidelines and restrictions prevented officials and visi-
tors from paying tribute to fallen veterans as they normally would.

“However,” Luera said, “the most important thing is we’re joined together to honor those
brave Americans who made the ultimate sacrifice for our freedoms and our way of life.”
Speakers included U.S. Rep.

Sheila Jackson Lee, the Houston Democrat. She stressed the honor she felt in recognizing
veterans who died serving the country.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200526/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. » Virus scales down Memorial Day ceremony.

“If not for those who lay in this cemetery, we would not be the Americans we are today,
prepared to fight and overcome a deadly disease,” Jackson Lee said.

Dua Hua, a pharmacist who served in the U.S. Navy from 1987 to 1993, said this year’s cer-
emony felt empty — a contrast to last year’s, which he said was motivating and exciting
for those there to pay their respects.

“It brings some sadness to me,” Hua said. “..:Today is one of the major days where we
choose to pause and respect and remember the ones who fought for us, who die for us, who
are willing to give it all for us, but not too many (were) here.”

The scaled-back Memorial Day is an antithesis of how Americans typically celebrate their
veterans.

“In our way of life, everybody knows, we are going to show our gratitude in a bold way. It’s
not just staying home and (remembering),” Hua said. “We as a nation, we show our
strength, we get together and we hold our hands together so we can tell the world that we
are Americans.”

Though the ceremony was brief and limited, the cemetery welcomed veterans, family
members, community members and others who wanted to visit grave sites throughout the
day, encouraging them to adhere to social distancing and safety guidelines.

Michael Parker Jr., a retired Marine, came with his son and daughter to honor his grandfa-
ther, who served in both the Army and Marines.

“I bring my kids every year to understand the value of today. It’s not about barbecue or
having another day off of school,” Parker said, but about how “some gave the ultimate
sacrifice.”

But without the sea of flags at the different grave sites, the thousands of people traversing
the cemetery, and groups, like the Girls and Boys Scouts, distributing flags, this Memorial
Day just didn’t feel the same, he said.

“Tt actually pains me to see it’s not being done,” Parker said.

For his part, Brownsberger stood and watched from the outskirts, reminiscing about pre-
vious years when he’d volunteer and mingle with other visitors for hours.

“T haven’t missed one yet,” Brownsberger said of the ceremony.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/houston-chronicle/20200526/page/1/textview 2/2
