2020. 6. 17. Name is taken off building at USC.

Name is taken off building at USC

Rufus von KleinSmid, the university’s fifth president, was a eugenics sup-
porter.

Los Angeles Times - 12 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Teresa Watanabe and Tomas Mier

With its soaring arches, international flags and globe-topped tower, the Von KleinSmid
Center for International and Public Affairs is one of the most prominent buildings at USC.
Its namesake, the late Rufus B. von KleinSmid, has held a place of distinction as the uni-
versity’s fifth president.

 

as the university at last reconciled with his disturbing leadership role in California’s eu-
genics movement.

The scholar, who is credited with expanding the university’s academic programs and in-
ternational relations curriculum as president from 1921 to 1947, believed that people with
“defects” had no ethical right to parenthood and should be sterilized. His “Human Better-
ment Foundation” was instrumental in supporting the 1909 Califor

nia legislation that authorized the forced sterilization of those deemed “unfit” — essen-
tially anyone nonwhite, said Alexandra Minna Stern, a University of Michigan history pro-
fessor and expert on eugenics.

His active support of eugenics is “at direct odds” with the university’s multicultural com-
munity and mission of diversity and inclusion, President Carol L. Folt announced.

“This moment is our Call to Action, a call to confront anti- Blackness and systemic racism,
and unite as a diverse, equal, and inclusive university,” Folt wrote. “You have asked for ac-
tions, not rhetoric, and actions, now.”

The university also removed Von KleinSmid’s bust from the building after a unanimous
vote by the Board of Trustees’ executive committee.

Tweets with the hashtag #VKCIsOverParty celebrating the change circulated Thursday
among USC students after photos of the building without Von KleinSmid’s name were
posted on the platform.

“Everything he believed in is a threat to the Black community and any marginalized com-
munity, so I do think it’s a step in the right direction,” said junior Jaya Hinton, co-director
of USC’s Black Student Assembly. “But anti-Blackness is more than just names on build-
ings. USC is an institution, and systemic, institutional racism is a real thing.”

USC had failed to respond to years of demands from within and outside the university to
remove Von KleinSmid’s name from the building.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200612/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Name is taken off building at USC.

They include Japanese Americans, who say Von KleinSmid prevented more than 150 sec-
ond-generation Nisei students from returning to USC after World War II, when tens of
thousands were wrongly incarcerated following Japan’s 1941 attack on Pearl Harbor.

Von KleinSmid was the only West Coast university president who refused to send their
transcripts to colleges in other states, where Japanese Americans released from incarcera-
tion camps were trying to finish their education, said Jon Kaji, past president of the USC
Asian Pacific Alumni Assn. He began pressing USC in 2012 to remove Von KleinSmid’s
name from the building but officials did not respond, he said.

But mass protests calling for racial justice, triggered by the death of George Floyd in Min-
neapolis, finally pushed USC to action. Folt said her office has been deluged with input
from students, staff, faculty leadership, deans, alumni and neighbors.

Earlier this week, students began circulating an online petition, similar to one in 2018,
calling for the renaming of the building. Last September, just an hour before Folt was
sworn in as USC president, the bust of Von KleinSmid was found with a rag over its face
with the words “rename VKC” on it and a piece of cardboard inscribed with “NAZI” hung
around its neck.

Last year, then-Provost Michael Quick announced the formation of a Nomenclature Task
Force to address concerns regarding building names, symbols and monuments. The com-
mittee’s formation came after members of the Undergraduate Student Government had
called for it a year before.

Folt also announced five other actions USC would immediately take to confront systemic
racism.

Form a community advisory board for the Department of Public Safety. Racial and identity
profiling, officer training, education, disciplinary matters, financial resources and part-
nerships with the Los Angeles Police Department are among issues that will be examined.
Convene a new task force on diversity, equity and inclusion. Folt said she will charge a new
committee to identify structural and institutional processes that perpetuate racism and i...
equality.

Hire a chief diversity, equity and inclusion officer.

Expand space and programming for underserved students, including those who are un-
documented, along with those who are the first in their families to attend college. The ex-
panded services will include students who are Black, Asian Pacific American, Latino, Na-
tive American, Middle Eastern, LGBTQ, veterans and former foster youths.

Mandatory unconscious-bias training.

Folt’s announcement drew cautious support from students who have been pressing for ac-
tion on the issue.

“She’s using the right words, for sure. I’m just hoping there’s action behind them,” said
USC rising senior Michael Mikail, who is majoring in political science. “I think it’s one step
in the right direction, but we have a lot of steps to go.”

In a Daily Trojan letter to the editor last week, Mikail had included the name change on a
list of actions he wanted Folt to take to better support Black students.

“I, and other Black students advocating for change, did not come to USC to be activists or
agitators,” said Mikail, who also serves as executive director of USC’s Pan-African Student

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200612/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Name is taken off building at USC.

Assembly. “We came for an education, and USC’s institutional failings have forced us into
these roles.”

Hinton, who is studying business administration, commended Folt’s other actions, such as
instituting implicit bias training. But she said she hoped not just students but also faculty
members, administration and Department of Public Safety members would be required to
take it.

George Sanchez, a professor of American studies and ethnicity and history at the school,
who has documented Von KleinSmid’s history, said the former USC president was a key
figure in pushing California to the forefront of the eugenics movement. The German Nazis
were reading writings by California scientists leading the movement, which was couched
as a scientific way to improve public health and welfare by regulating the makeup of Amer-
ica’s “racial stock.”

“They were seen as reformers,” Sanchez said. “At the time, these ideas were seen as what
the social sciences and science should work together to make a better society.”
California’s sterilization law did not call out race explicitly, instead targeting those with
“mental deficiencies” and “feeblemindedness.”

But the labels were disproportionately applied to racial and ethnic minorities, people with
actual and perceived disabilities, poor people and women, Stern said, and the eugenics lit-
erature of the time specifically mentioned Mexicans, Filipinos and, later, Japanese and Ja-
panese Americans.

Overall, about 20,000 people in a dozen California state institutions were sterilized
throughout the 20th century under the law, which was repealed in 1979, Stern said.

Her research lab has found that Latinos were sterilized at significantly higher rates than
others in the institutions, the majority of whom were white. Latinas were 59% more likely
to be sterilized than non-Latinas, the lab found.

Assemblywoman Wendy Carrillo (D-Los Angeles) has introduced legislation to compen-
sate survivors of sterilization.

“To me, this is California’s version of Confederate monuments,” Sanchez said. “This his-
tory of eugenics and sterilization is central to California’s racial history. In a sense, USC
understands that it has a long history that is implicated in this, but I think they waited un-
til a moment like this to act.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200612/page/1/textview 3/3
