2020. 6. 17. A new kind of distancing

A new kind of distancing
Some L.A. politicians refuse police union donations

Los Angeles Times - 10 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Emily Alpert Reyes

It was the morning after Los Angeles Councilwoman Monica Rodriguez and other officials
had proposed cutting up to $150 million from the Police Department, and she was facing a
dismayed crowd at a command post in Panorama City.

F r 7 T Ea ;

   

; ih 4 é ‘ill 3

 

————_
One officer accused Rodriguez of “pandering” to protesters and said that if it weren’t for
the police, the city would have burned down.
“T promise you, this union will go to our grave fighting .... We’re gonna fight,” said Jerretta
Sandoz, a board member with the Los Angeles Police Protective League.
“At the ballot box,” another person chimed in.
The union, which represents rank-and-file officers, has been a significant force in local
elections. In the past decade, it has given more than $100,000 directly to city candidates.
Its independent expenditure committees, which cannot legally be controlled by candidates
and do not have the same limits on donations, have spent millions of dollars more.
Now that money is under scrutiny by Angelenos supporting a national movement against
police brutality — and some local politicians say they won’t accept it
anymore. It is the latest sign of the push against longstanding practices at City Hall as
Black Lives MatterLos Angeles and other activist groups have pushed to defund and over-
haul the Police Department.
When Rodriguez ran for office three years ago, the union backed her candidacy with more
than $100,000 in mailers and telephone calls. It also spent more than $220,000 to support
Councilman Joe Buscaino when he first ran nine years ago. And when Garcetti first ran for
mayor, the union sponsored committees that spent more than $1.5 million backing his op-
ponent. It has successfully pushed to rework officer discipline and advocated for higher
pay.
More recently, the group spent $150,000 to back Councilman John Lee, who narrowly kept
his seat earlier this year; gave $50,000 to another committee supporting Councilman Herb
Wesson as he campaigns to become a county supervisor; and spent nearly $45,000 in sup-
port of Councilman David Ryu, who is facing off against nonprofit leader Nithya Raman.
Raman argued that politicians should disavow such spending, saying that it distorts deci-
sions when every elected official in the city has been bolstered by political donations from
the police union.
https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200610/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. A new kind of distancing

As protesters have faced batons and other violent tactics, “the reluctance of our local offi-
cials to speak out against even clearly documented harms is a sign of the power of the po-
lice union,” said Raman, who wants to reassess the LAPD budget.

Ryu said Tuesday that he had returned a campaign donation from the union and was dis-
avowing any future independent spending by the group on his behalf. The councilman said
he had opposed increasing the LAPD budget while other city services were being cut and
argued that the city needs to reexamine the use of force.

L.A. also needs “a visionary, long-term plan to replace the use of police officers to address
chronic social issues,” Ryu said.

Councilman Mike Bonin also said Tuesday that he was rejecting any future contributions
from the police union, which has donated directly to the councilman and whose indepen-
dent committees have spent over $45,000 backing his candidacy.

Bonin, who has raised concerns about police tactics during protests, said he was making a
personal donation in the amount he had received directly in the past — more than $4,000
for his campaigns and office holder accounts — to organizations working to oppose racism
and reform policing, including Black Lives Matter. He also said he would disavow indepen-
dent spending by the union.

“Angelenos are demanding a new approach to how we keep our neighborhoods safe, and
they want to know that their public representatives are accountable to the people,” Bonin
said.

And there has been an especially concerted push for elected prosecutors to forgo money
from police unions. George Gascon, who is running to unseat Los Angeles County D.A.
Jackie Lacey, recently joined other prosecutors in lobbying to prohibit district attorneys
from accepting support from police unions, which Gascon said he would no longer do.
Lacey has shunned that idea, arguing that “any proposal that prevents a union from ac-
tively engaging their members in the democratic process is an extremely dangerous path
to go down.” In a statement, she contended that “silencing the voices of labor unions sets
a bad precedent” that could hurt unions representing teachers and nurses.

Lee, the councilman representing the northwest San Fernando Valley, said he was honored
to have the union’s support for his campaigns. Wesson said that “direct or independent
donations to me or my opponent carry zero weight when I vote.”

And City Atty. Mike Feuer, who is running for mayor, “strongly believes any past donations
do not in any way undermine his ability to exercise independent judgment with regard to
LAPD,” his campaign consultant John Shallman said. Such arguments were echoed by
council members Rodriguez, Bob Blumenfield, Mitch O’ Farrell and Paul Koretz and County
Supervisor Mark RidleyThomas, who is running for a council seat against attorney Grace
Yoo.

Union spokesperson Dustin DeRollo said “there is no expectation or belief that there is a
connection between a contribution and an official action,” pointing out that Wesson had
signed on to the proposal to reduce LAPD funding.

That has not persuaded Wesson’s opponent, State Sen. Holly Mitchell (D-Los Angeles),
whose campaign manager Lenee Richards called Wesson “the candidate of the police

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200610/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. A new kind of distancing

unions” and said Mitchell would not accept such donations, stating that “it is time for
leadership that is free from corruption and influence.”

Progressive activists have also been skeptical. If the spending didn’t affect politicians, “it
wouldn’t be done in the first place,” said Chris Roth, an organizer with the activist group
Ground Game LA, which wants to cut the police budget.

Roth argued that the political clout of the union “has basically prevented any discussion
about reducing the size of the police budget” until now.

The San Fernando Valley Young Democrats recently made disavowing contributions from
law enforcement groups a condition for its endorsement. Swearing off that money “would
show Angelenos that these L.A. elected officials are not beholden to police and police
unions first and the people second,” legislative director Andrew Lewis said.

Lewis pointed to the budget — which allocates more than half of “unrestricted” revenue in
the general fund to the LAPD — as a key indication of how the police union had com-
manded influence over City Hall. The police union has argued that pay needs to be high
enough to prevent the city from losing officers to other agencies.

Wesson, Garcetti and other city officials also championed Charter Amendment C, a suc-
cessful 2017 ballot measure backed by the police union that allowed disciplinary panels to
be made up entirely of civilians. Opponents including BLM and other local activists had op-
posed the change and argued that civilians tend to be more lenient toward officers.
DeRollo argued that voters value the political voice of police officers. The union has been
especially outspoken over the past week: After Garcetti joined the calls to cut police fund-
ing and made a remark about “killers” that the union saw as a smear against officers, it
called him “unstable.”

Garcetti said his remarks were misconstrued and that he wasn’t referring to police. Union
board member Jamie McBride later appeared on a Spectrum News 1 report about police
providing security at Council President Nury Martinez’s home, calling it a “disgusting”
use of taxpayer money and “ironic” in light of her call to reduce the police budget.
Martinez spokesman Rick Coca said the LAPD had suggested a security detail in response
to threats.

Martinez, asked about past donations from the union, said in a statement that she answers
to her constituents, “who are calling out for justice and change and to root out racism in
all aspects of our lives.”

Some L.A. officials argued that the push against police union donations was counterpro-
ductive. Blumenfield said that “political gestures like this would only deepen the divide
and reduce our potential for substantive negotiations.”

Buscaino spokesman Branimir Kvartuc said the councilman wasn’t “picking sides” and
hadn’t considered the issue. Several other officials did not promptly respond to questions
about political spending by the police union; a Garcetti aide said the mayor is not currently
a candidate for office.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200610/page/1/textview 3/3
