2020. 6. 17. MAYOR TO SEEK BUDGET CUTS IN LAPD

MAYOR TO SEEK BUDGET CUTS IN LAPD

Heeding protesters, Garcetti hopes to reinvest the money in communities
of color.

Los Angeles Times - 4 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Emily Alpert Reyes, David Zahniser and Dakota Smith

When Los Angeles was plunged into a budget crisis earlier this year, progressive activists
demanded that the City Council slash spending at the Police Department, saying it’s wrong
to boost funding for officers while cutting other urgently needed services.

 

The debate over police spending at City Hall has only intensified after several days of
protests against police brutality, the LAPD’s response to those demonstrations and the
looting that sometimes followed.

Activists with Black Lives Matter, Ground Game LA and other grassroots groups Say inci-
dents in recent days where officers have used aggressive tactics including projectiles and
batons only reinforce the need to defund the LAPD.

“This crisis that we are facing now, with police violence, has got people thinking, ‘Is this
what we want? ” said Akili, an organizer with Black Lives Matter-Los Angeles, who goes
by only his last name.

Akili touted an alternative spending plan for City Hall, dubbed the People’s Budget, that
would cut the vast majority of the LAPD’s funding. But other community leaders, and at
least some elected officials, say the recent outbreak in loot

ing, vandalism and arson shows precisely why the city needs the number of officers it has.
“Ten thousand officers were barely able to keep the peace,” said Councilman Paul Koretz,
whose Westside district includes Beverly Boulevard, Melrose Avenue and other business
districts where looting occurred. “Imagine if we didn’t have the response that we did.”
Mayor Eric Garcetti had originally proposed a 7% spending increase for the LAPD, includ-
ing a lucrative package of raises and bonuses for rank-and-file officers. But Wednesday, a
day after thousands of protesters chanted “defund the police” outside his Windsor Square
home, Garcetti said he had changed course, deciding now is not the time to increase the
department budget.

Garcetti said his administration would look for $250 million in cuts from city departments,
including the LAPD, and steer the funds to job programs, health initiatives and other ser-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200604/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. MAYOR TO SEEK BUDGET CUTS IN LAPD

vices supporting communities of color. As part of those reductions, the LAPD would see
cuts of $100 million to $150 million, he said, from the department’s overall budget of $1.86
billion.

Council President Nury Martinez and several of her colleagues proposed the same reduc-
tions for the LAPD, which could eliminate the increase planned in Garcetti’s budget.
“While a complete overhaul of the city’s budget will take time, we can begin to slowly dis-
mantle those systems that are designed to harm people of color,” Martinez said. “A pre-
liminary cut to the LAPD budget will not solve everything, but it’s a step in the right direc-
tion.”

Progressive activists said those actions do not go far enough. Meanwhile, leaders of the
LAPD’s biggest union were furious with Martinez’s choice of words, saying they were “of-
fensive” and dehumanized police officers.

The City Council, which normally reviews and approves the mayor’s budget each year, had
allowed Garcetti’s citywide spending plan to go into effect on Monday without a vote.

But council members also promised to make changes to his budget in the coming weeks to
address a major crunch triggered by the shutdowns that have accompanied the coron-
avirus outbreak.

Garcetti’s budget, first proposed in April, called for police spending to consume 53.8% of
the city’s “unrestricted” general fund revenue — taxes that are not earmarked for special
purposes or certain fees, fines and grants. The LAPD makes up 17.6% of the city’s overall
$10.5-billion budget, a figure that does not include police pensions and healthcare, ac-
cording to budget officials.

The amount of police spending in L.A. has long been a source of frustration for activists.
This year, Black Lives Matter-Los Angeles teamed up with other grassroots organizations
to survey Angelenos about their budget priorities and draft their People’s Budget.

Under their alternative spending plan for the coming year, police would receive only 5.7%
of the city’s general fund — a reduction of nearly 90% compared with the mayor’s budget.
Ground Game LA, one of the groups involved in the People’s Budget LA coalition, said
9,000 of the LAPD’s 10,000 officers should be replaced with tenants’ rights workers, men-
tal health counselors, gang intervention workers and others who could address social
needs.

“T don’t think there’s any way to get a 90% reduction without layoffs, and that would be
OK,” said Bill Przylucki, executive director of Ground Game LA. “But if they lay them all off
and then hoard the money, that’s not a solution. We need to reinvest those dollars in all
the right programs.”

Przylucki said the LAPD had shown repeatedly over the years that it was not capable of
keeping the peace in a way that de-escalates confrontation — and that the skirmishes of
the past week only reinforced that lesson.

A coalition of labor and advocacy groups have pushed their own plan, urging Garcetti to cut
the LAPD budget by at least $250 million. Neighborhood councils have chimed in as well.
On Monday, the Silver Lake Neighborhood Council urged the city to redirect money from
the LAPD to social services, rent relief and other programs. Julia Forgie, who sits on the

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200604/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. MAYOR TO SEEK BUDGET CUTS IN LAPD

Los Feliz Neighborhood Council, which took similar action, said at a meeting this week
that she was worried Garcetti would use recent events to bolster support for his budget.
“It’s important that we sort of reframe the conversation preemptively, to make sure that
[city officials] understand that these events don’t indicate that we need more funding for
police,” she said.

Lee Williams, board chairman of the San Pedro Chamber of Commerce, voiced alarm at the
idea of cutting the LAPD. If the department has fewer officers, he said, response times will
go up, community policing programs will suffer, and the neighborhood will be less safe
overall.

“That would be crushing for San Pedro,” said Williams, a San Pedro resident himself.

Los Angeles Police Protective League President Craig Lally, whose union represents rank-
and-file officers, said defunding the LAPD would leave neighborhoods vulnerable to crime
and serve as a “dream come true for gang members and criminals.” Such cuts would mean
slower responses to 911 calls, stalled investigations and fewer officers able to assist when
fellow officers need backup, he said.

If the People’s Budget proposed by activists becomes a reality, “the last several nights of
mayhem in Los Angeles will be the new normal,” he said.

Council members have shown little appetite for cutting the LAPD as dramatically as out-
lined in the People’s Budget. But several said in recent days that they could not shield po-
lice from cuts when other employees were facing reductions.

Councilman Mike Bonin, who represents coastal neighborhoods, suggested asking the po-
lice union to postpone raises. Councilman Marqueece HarrisDawson, who represents parts
of South Los Angeles, said it’s hard for him to imagine that anyone following recent events
would conclude that “a lack of police is our problem.”

Asked how many officers the LAPD should have, Harris-Dawson responded: “I don’t think
there’s a right number. I’m a person who looks at outcomes.”

Reducing the LAPD budget, he said, has to be part of the upcoming budget discussions.
“We have to respond to the activists on the one side, who raise a very legitimate point, and
we have to respond to reality” — that city officials will likely need to make more cuts to
balance the budget, he said.

‘While a complete overhaul of the city’s budget will take time, we can begin to slowly dis-
mantle those systems that are designed to harm people of color.’ — Nury Martinez, L.A.
City Council president

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200604/page/1/textview 3/3
