2020. 6. 17. COVID has the world in its grip

COVID has the world in its grip

Six months after the coronavirus outbreak began, nearly every corner of the
planet has been affected.

Los Angeles Times - 14 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Shashank Bengali, Patrick J. McDonnell, David Pierson and Laura King

The chroniclers of history’s great plagues — physicians and novelists, diarists and archiv-
ists — tend to recount uncannily similar moments, always poignant in retrospect, when
people allow themselves to believe that the devastation has reached its height. And then it
gets worse. The novel coronavirus is no longer a novelty. Some six months after the out-
break began in Wuhan, China, and three months after COVID-19’s formal designation as a
pandemic, nearly every corner of the world has been touched. Billions of people found

themselves in lockdowns and shutdowns; economies everywhere cratered.
a

   

 

Now, though, many parts of the planet are behaving as if a corner has been turned. The
gears of daily life are again beginning to grind; the workaday world is reasserting itself.
But infectious disease specialists say the virus could smolder and flare, subside and reap-
pear, for a very long time to come — even after a widely available vaccine is developed.

In the United States and Europe, the pace of new infections has slowed from springtime
peaks. But in the world as a whole, the caseload is growing fast, and experts are deeply
alarmed by the speed of the spread in far-flung countries such as Pakistan, South Africa
and Brazil.

On Friday, the World Health Organization reported a fresh record singleday high for new
cases worldwide: more than 136,500, most of them in the Americas, Russia and South Asia.
More than 7.7 million cases, and nearly 430,000 deaths — roughly one-quarter of them in
the United States — have been reported to the WHO.

“Globally, it is worsening,” the organization said.

There are success stories such as New Zealand, which recently pronounced the virus eradi-
cated. But in

countries where the epidemiological picture has brightened, including many in Western
Europe, “the biggest threat is now complacency,” said WHO DirectorGeneral Tedros Ad-
hanom Ghebreyesus.

“This is not the time for any country to take its foot off the pedal,” he said.

An outbreak of contagion is often bracketed by momentous events. The Plague of Athens
occurred in the midst of the Peloponnesian War; the 1918-19 influenza pandemic erupted

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200614/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. COVID has the world in its grip

in the waning days of World War I, its victims ultimately far outnumbering those who died
in combat.

The coronavirus outbreak took hold shortly before the George Floyd protests for racial jus-
tice swept the United States and beyond; even at so necessary a moment of mass outcry,
health experts worried over infection peril posed by the enormous gatherings.

In some countries where the situation is growing more dire, governmental denials of the
outbreak’s gravity and a wholesale rejection of economically costly shutdowns are helping
the virus either to cement its foothold — or to come roaring back.

Dr. Anthony Fauci, the U.S. government’s top infectious disease specialist — seen less in
public in the weeks since the White House halted briefings by its coronavirus task force —
last week called the virus “my worst nightmare.”

Speaking to a biotechnology conference via a recorded video, Fauci said that in a span of
months, the coronavirus had “devastated the world.”

“It just took over the planet,” he said. “And it isn’t over yet.”

Here is a look at several key regional tipping points in the worldwide coronavirus fight.
South Asia

South Asia has emerged as one of the virus’ new global hot spots. India, with nearly
309,000 recorded infections as of Saturday, has surpassed Britain in recent days to become
the fourthworst- affected country, behind the U.S., Brazil and Russia.

The past week saw India notch its highest single-day totals for new infections. More than
8,800 people have died from COVID-19, even as India imposed one of the world’s most
stringent lockdowns beginning in late March.

Last week India began to ease the lockdown to restart its economy, making it one of the
few countries to lift social distancing restrictions before recording a drop in infections.

In Mumbai, the commercial capital, buses, taxis and private cars have returned to streets
newly jammed with traffic. Recent social media images showed Marine Drive, the city’s
sea-facing promenade, crowded with residents out for walks and exercise, some not wear-
ing masks.

One resident who dropped by his office in the city’s Fort district last week said the sidewalk
was packed with people sipping cups of tea, their masks off.

The developments have raised concerns that India will be deluged with new COVID-19
cases. The country still has lower testing rates and poorer contact tracing mechanisms
than other reopening economies, “leaving it unprepared to control COVID-19 outbreaks,”
according to an analysis by IndiaSpend, an independent data journalism website.

The capital city of New Delhi alone could see 550,000 cases by the end of July, 80,000 of
which could require hospitalization, local officials predict. A report in the Indian Express
newspaper said the city has fewer than 58,000 hospital beds.

Infections are also rising fast in Pakistan, which last week tallied new daily highs. Pakistan
has more than 132,000 people infected in all.

Yet Prime Minister Imran Khan has announced a gradual reopening of the economy while
requiring that residents continue to wear masks and enforcing social distancing measures
at mosques, on public transportation and in other crowded areas.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200614/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. COVID has the world in its grip

The World Health Organization has warned that the reopening is ill-timed, and in a letter
urged Punjab, the most populous province, to reimpose a two-week lockdown.

But Zafar Mirza, Khan’s top health advisor, said Pakistan

would not follow the WHO’s recommendation.

“The WHO only takes health-related factors into account while governments have to think
of the public’s livelihoods as well,” Mirza said.

— Times staff writer Bengali in Singapore and special correspondent Aoun Sahi in
Islamabad,

Pakistan

Latin America

The pandemic is cutting a path of devastation through much of Latin America, now widely
considered its new epicenter.

The region’s infection curve was about a month behind that in the United States and is
thought to be peaking or nearing its most dangerous phase in many areas, including in
Brazil and Mexico, the region’s two most populous countries.

Public health advocates have expressed alarm that some governments are beginning to re-
open pandemic-battered economies before ever imposing the kind of strict lockdowns,
testing regimes and tracing that helped stifle the virus elsewhere.

“Now is not the time to relax restrictions or scale back preventive strategies,” Carissa F.
Etienne, director of the Pan American Health Organization, told reporters in Washington
in late May. “Now is the time to stay strong, remain vigilant, and aggressively implement
proven public health measures.”

The rising numbers of cases have strained hospitals, emergency services, morgues, ceme-
teries and crematoriums across a region where years of neglect and underfunding have
hollowed out much of the public healthcare infrastructure.

In both Brazil and Mexico, the pervasive shortage of testing and lack of data on deaths
make it nearly impossible to calculate the ever-expanding dimensions of the crisis.

Brazil has recorded more than 850,000 cases, ranking second globally to the United States,
and more than 42,000 coronavirus-related deaths, second after the United States and sur-
passing Britain.

Complicating matters in Brazil are the country’s prevalent political turmoil, its economic
tailspin and denialism from the government of President Jair Bolsonaro — who early on
dismissed the virus as a “little flu” and has seen two health ministers leave their positions
during the pandemic.

Brazil has sometimes reported more than 1,000 virus-related deaths a day, but recently cut
down on reporting data in what critics call an attempted cover-up.

Mexico has reported more than 142,000 cases and more than 16,000 deaths, but both
numbers are probably vast undercounts in a country with one of the sparsest testing
regimes in the Americas. Various studies have shown that coronavirus-linked deaths in
Mexico City may be more than three times the officially acknowledged numbers.

Almost 1 in 5 confirmed cases in Mexico involves doctors, nurses and other healthcare
workers, a fact that many attribute to a widespread lack of functioning surgical masks and
other protective gear.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200614/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. COVID has the world in its grip

The government has been bringing in planeloads of protective equipment from abroad and
recruiting doctors and other health workers to bolster care staff in the hard-hit metropoli-
tan Mexico City area, home to some 22 million people. — Times staff writer McDonnell in
Mexico City

Southeast Asia

Daily case counts continue to rise in parts of Southeast Asia, though that hasn’t stopped
some governments from loosening restrictions on social distancing.

In the Indonesian capital of Jakarta, restaurants, retail outlets and public transportation
reopened last week only days after the country reported its highest rise in infections in one
day. Health officials said many of the new cases were linked to migrant workers returning
from abroad.

Indonesia’s leaders imposed some restrictions on movement beginning in

April, but resisted stricter measures over fears of harming the economy.

An outbreak that started in Jakarta has since spread across the archipelagic nation, infect-
ing over 37,000 people and killing more than 2,000. Experts say the true number is proba-
bly much higher because of underreporting and inadequate testing.

The disease’s toll is also thought to be much worse in the Philippines, where over 25,000
cases and at least 1,074 deaths have been reported.

Health authorities in the country of 108 million said a recent increase in reported cases was
due to improved testing rather than the easing of quarantine measures in Manila and its
surrounding areas.

Many businesses have reopened in the capital with rules limiting the number of workers
and customers permitted inside. City administration offices are thronged with residents
applying for medical certificates needed to travel around the country.

The two island nations are anomalies in Asia, where cases have plunged and everyday life
has restarted in China, South Korea, Japan and Thailand.

Meanwhile, Taiwan, Vietnam, Cambodia and Hong Kong never experienced major out-
breaks. China is resuming some travel to and from destinations such as Singapore.
Singapore, however, remains under a stricter lockdown than many of its regional neigh-
bors. Residents won’t be permitted to dine out, shop in stores or visit friends until the end
of the month at the earliest.

Roughly the size of the San Fernando Valley, Singapore experienced a major outbreak in its
migrant-labor dormitories, resulting in most of the city-state’s more than 40,000 infec-
tions. Singapore’s highly developed health system has kept deaths from COVID-19 rela-
tively low at 26, as of Saturday.

— Times staff writer Pierson in Singapore

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200614/page/1/textview 4/4
