2020. 6. 17. Trump’s leverage on China limited

Trump’s leverage on China limited

Los Angeles Times - 29 May 2020 - A1 - By Don Lee and Tracy Wilkinson

Facing pressure to take a hard line over Beijing’s crackdown on Hong Kong, the president
is leaning toward relatively light sanctions.

WASHINGTON — Under political pressure to take a hard line against China for its crack-
down on Hong Kong, President Trump instead is planning to impose relatively mild new
sanctions on visas and Chinese access to the global financial system.

The president wants to cool the growing confrontation between the world’s two most eco-
nomically powerful nations, in part to salvage their trade deal and his personal relation-
ship with Chinese President Xi Jinping, according to some supporters, including Stephen K.
Bannon, the former senior White House strategist. But to a large extent, the moderate re-
sponse reflects just how little leverage the United States has over China.

“Beijing holds all of the cards in this dispute and has made it quite clear that it is willing to
take actions that will harm the well-being of Hong Kong in order to protect national secu-
rity as the Chinese Communist Party defines it,” said Robert Daly, a China-U.S. relations
expert at the Wilson Center.

“That is the fundamental decision that has already been taken. And because Hong Kong is
fully a part of the PRC, there’s not much the United States can do to change its mind,” he
said, using the abbreviation for the People’s Republic of China.

This week, Trump vowed to respond “very powerfully” to what’s widely regarded as Bei-
jing’s significant abridgment of Hong Kong’s autonomy and personal freedom, which is
greater than what exists on the mainland. But such action would also probably cause con-
siderable financial harm to the Hong Kong economy and people.

“The U.S. will do what we can and thread that needle as best we can,” said David Stilwell,
assistant secretary of State for East Asian and

Pacific affairs.

Trump could have chosen to strike a more powerful blow, as some of his more nationalistic
supporters urged: curtailing the special financial and trade privileges that Hong Kong en-
joys in the global marketplace, with support from the United States. Those privileges have
been extremely valuable to Beijing, providing it with financial benefits that China would
not enjoy as a more closed and less-transparent economy.

Trump’s decision to avoid tougher action was seen as shaped in part by election-year poli-
tics. Even as the president’s campaign is depicting his Democratic rival Joe Biden as soft on
China, Trump is eager to protect the new trade deal in which China has promised to buy
huge quantities of U.S. products, especially from struggling American farmers who have
been among his strongest supporters.

A harsher U.S. response would probably lead Beijing to cancel the deal. Even before this
showdown, many analysts considered that China was unlikely to live up to its trade com-
mitments.

As expected, China’s rubber-stamp parliament on Thursday approved legislation expand-
ing the central government’s power to crack down on protests and other activities in Hong

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200529/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Trump’s leverage on China limited

Kong.

“The president’s trying to do a graduated response,” said Bannon, a sharp critic of the
Chinese Communist Party leadership.

“T don’t think that’s correct, but he’s getting pressure from a lot of different parties. And
he believes strongly he’s got a relationship with Xi,” Bannon said, referring to China’s au-
thoritarian leader.

Protests over its encroachment on Hong Kong’’s special freedoms have apparently stiff-
ened Beijing’s determination to end the Chinese territory’s semiautonomous status.
Faced with that, Trump administration officials were noticeably torn about what to do.
While they wanted to go well beyond mere condemnation or symbolic actions that Beijing
could easily ignore, taking strong measures to curtail Hong Kong’s role as a financial hub
would hurt the territory and its population of 7.5 million, as well as the nearly 2,000
American firms operating there.

“Our approach is to mitigate the impact globally on the Hong Kong people while at the
same time helping Beijing understand our concerns,” said Stilwell, the assistant secretary
of State.

Revoking Hong Kong’s special economic and trading status with the United States, which
Congress guaranteed would continue after Britain’s handover if Hong Kong remained au-
tonomous, was considered the “nuclear option.” An autonomous Hong Kong has been a
base for China’s top companies and political elite to get access to international capital, ex-
port goods more advantageously and make investments.

The U.S. treats Hong Kong as a separate customs district, and goods shipped from there are
not subject to U.S. tariffs on exports from mainland China. Nor does Hong Kong face the
export controls on sensitive technologies that apply to the mainland.

Britain, which has expressed deep concern over Beijing’s move on Hong Kong, said it
would offer Hong Kong residents with British passports greater visa rights and a pathway
to British citizenship if China imposes the new security law.

Trump’s response is expected to leave intact the U.S.-China trade deal that he agreed to in
January, at least for now. Under the so-called Phase 1 deal, China committed to buying
$200 billion more goods from the United States over the next two years, a top political pri-
ority for Trump.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200529/page/1/textview 2/2
