2020. 6. 17. Pandemic won't take holiday

Pandemic won’t take holiday
As deaths mount, Trump plays outside — and Americans follow

Los Angeles Times + 25 May 2020 - A1 - By Laura King

WASHINGTON — Preparing to celebrate Memorial Day, Americans flocked to beaches and
parks Sunday, with many ignoring disease precautions even as the nation’ s corona virus
related deaths approached the bleak milepost of 100,000.

i 4 Ss Rhee

a =

      
 

 

> 2a a ee

As public health experts made a fresh round of appeals for physical distancing and face
coverings, President Trump visited his Virginia golf property for a second straight day.

He delivered an upbeat message while heading for the links, despite both the death count
and predictions that double-digit U.S. unemployment would drag on into the early winter
— past the November election — possibly coinciding with a second wave of infections.
“Cases, numbers and deaths are going down all over the Country!” Trump tweeted from
the motorcade en route to his club.

Although the outbreak has eased in many areas, dangerous hot spots

remain, including Greater Los Angeles, Chicago and Washington, D.C., with spikes in some
less populated places as well.

“This isn’t contained, and it’s still continuing to spread,” former Food and Drug Adminis-
tration Commissioner Scott Gottlieb said Sunday on CBS’ “Face the Nation.” He cited ris-
ing hospitalizations in “many states: Florida, Georgia, Virginia, Maryland, Minnesota,
Wisconsin, Ohio, Arizona.”

After weeks of restrictions meant to fight the spread of COVID-19, the disease caused by
the coronavirus, every state is in some stage of reopening. Many, though, have failed to
meet U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidelines for a safe return to public
life.

One of the country’s leading virus experts, Dr. Deborah Birx, the director of Trump’s coro-
navirus task force, warns that even in the open air, physical distancing and face coverings,
when in proximity to others, are essential.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200525/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Pandemic won't take holiday

“Out of respect for each other, as Americans that care for each other, we need to be wear-
ing masks in public when we cannot socialdistance,” Birx said on “Fox News Sunday.”
That message was echoed in sharper terms by Tom Bossert, Trump’s former White House
homeland security advisor, who has at times been critical of the administration’s pan-
demic response.

“Wear a mask — it’s common decency,” he said, citing the theme of respect and remem-
brance that underpins Memorial Day. “Pray and think about those that passed in our for-
mer wars ... but also about those that passed in the last three months.”

His former boss, however, was characteristically mask-free Saturday and Sunday as he
came and went from the White House and his club.

With the three-day holiday weekend in full swing, news reports and social media featured
many images of people clustering tightly at waterfronts, in swimming pools and in al-
fresco bars and restaurants without wearing masks. However, despite Trump’s insistence
Friday that states allow places of worship to reopen,

Americans did not seem to be filling pews Sunday; even conservative congregations were
largely closed, offering prayer fellowship online or in parking lots.

Tens of thousands more Americans have died in the pandemic than in Vietnam and all of
the country’s conflicts since, combined. On Sunday, the New York Times memorialized the
dead with a striking gesture, devoting the entire front page and several inside ones to list-
ing 1,000 names — just 1% of the total deceased — with short but vivid snippets of their
lives culled from obituaries.

“Incalculable loss,” the headline read.

Birx, who is often at pains to avoid disagreements with

Trump, was asked in the Fox interview about the president’s refusal to wear a face cover-
ing in public. Trump told reporters that he had worn a mask for part of a factory tour in
Michigan last week but that he did not want to give journalists the “pleasure” of seeing
him in it.

“T’m not with him every day and every moment, so I don’t know if he can maintain social
distance,” Birx said. “I’ve asked everybody independently to really make sure that you’re
wearing a mask if you can’t maintain the six feet. I’m assuming that in a majority of cases
he’s able to maintain that six-feet distance.”

Bossert was more acerbic, telling ABC News in response to a question about Trump and
masks: “‘Do as I say, not as I do’ isn’t very useful.”

At a White House briefing last week, before Trump’s weekend golf outings, Birx said she
well understood the public’s need for outdoor recreation, especially over a long holiday
weekend. “You can go out. You can be outside. You can play golf. You can play tennis with
marked balls. You can go to the beaches if you stay six feet apart,” she said then.
Although many people are flouting distancing and masking recommendations while out-
doors, Birx told ABC News, “I think that’s our job to continue to communicate.”

Though overall White House messaging, and certainly Trump’s, has focused on a robust
economic recovery beginning soon, a senior Trump advisor said Sunday that joblessness
would continue to rise this month and next, after reaching nearly 40 million claims last
week.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200525/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Pandemic won't take holiday

“The unemployment rate will be higher in June than in May, but then after that, it should
start to trend down,” economic advisor Kevin Hassett said on CNN’s “State of the Union.”
Asked whether he thought the jobless rate would still be in the double digits in November,
when the election is held, Hassett said: “Yes, I do.” But he also predicted that signs of a
larger economic recovery would be “raging everywhere” by then.

The Trump administration has been widely criticized for its handling of the pandemic, but
the president has often called restrictions he imposed on travel from China — and later
Europe — as policy triumphs. On Sunday, the White House announced that Trump was
suspending U.S. entry by foreign nationals who had been in hard-hit Brazil in the preced-
ing 14 days.

Public health experts have predicted that, by late fall, the U.S. could be in the grip of a sec-
ond wave of infections, but Trump said last week that the country, and the economy,
would stay open in any event. Birx, asked about the likelihood of new lockdowns, said “it’s
difficult to tell” what measures might be taken if the outbreak took on a new ferocity.
Gottlieb, in his CBS interview, said Americans should not be lulled into complacency if in-
fections and deaths eased somewhat in the summer season.

“We're likely to have this slow burn through the summer, and then face renewed risk in
the fall that we’re going to have bigger outbreaks and potentially epidemics in certain
states and cities,” he said. “That’s what we need to be focused on right now, getting the
tools in place to prevent that in the fall.”

‘Pray and think about those that passed in our former wars ... but also about those that
passed in the last three months.’ — Tom Bossert, President Trump’s former White House
homeland security advisor

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200525/page/1/textview 3/3
