2020. 6. 17. Gold medalist's f ight for equality

Gold medalist’s f ight for equality

Los Angeles Times - 12 Jun 2020 - A1

The deaths of Blacks have galvanized U.S. track athlete Tianna Bartoletta in the quest for
justice.

“7

It should be simple. Plot a route and a pace, start running and wait for the endorphins to
kick in. Tianna Bartoletta’s reality is more complicated than that.

When she leaves her Bay Area home for a training run she knows that people she encoun-
ters might not see a three-time Olympic gold medalist, a driven athlete who ran the first
leg of a world-record performance by the U.S. women’s 400meter relay at the 2012 London
Games, started the relay off toward gold again four years later, when she won the gold
medal in the long jump at Rio with a personal-best leap. They might see only a Black
woman running and decide she’s an interloper in their neighborhood, in their world, and
who knows what they might do next?

She decided she’d set the tone and take the initiative “when approaching someone who
doesn’t look like me or have the same complexion.” So she follows a three-step protocol:
She smiles, raises her hand in a friendly wave and then says something cheerful about the
weather or the day before continuing, hoping that was enough to earn her safe passage
home.

“It’s not something I was ever taught to do, yet it was inherent, it was just an intuitive re-
action I had to approaching people. It felt like it was just programmed and ingrained in my
body,” she said during a phone conversation.

“T have had so far no negative reactions, and honestly I don’t set myself up for those be-
cause I’m modifying my behavior before I even reach any other person, if that makes
sense. There isn’t even a situation where I’d want to know what would happen if I don’t do
that.”

It’s heartbreaking that an Olympic and world champion who has been cheered by thou-
sands on global stages feels she must make it clear she’s not threatening when she runs
past people on the street. “Sure, it’s awful and I shouldn’t have to do it,” she said, “but you
want to survive.”

Bartoletta, 34, has never run away from anything. She continues to push up hills and down
streets while she recalibrates her life and athletic schedule after the postponement of the
Summer Olympics, putting on hold her planned return to the molecular microbiology pro-
gram at the University of Tennessee.

“T had to basically do a cognitive shift. It’s not happening this year, but as far as we know it
is happening next year,” she said of the Tokyo Games. “I could choose to look at it as a de-
lay that is horrible and devastating because the delay comes with its own issues, of con-
tracts and sponsors and all that, or I could look at it as I have another year to prepare to
defend my title. And there’s no real world in which having an extra year to prepare for
something is bad.”
https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200612/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Gold medalist's f ight for equality

Working on her blog is cathartic, helping her process the trauma of undergoing emergency
fibroid surgery last December, the Olympic delay and the gnawing anxiety she has felt
since the death of George Floyd under the knee of a Minneapolis police officer triggered
nationwide protests over institutional racism. She’s a keen observer with a blunt, affecting
style. Writing is among her ambitions, and she has already found a strong voice.

“T don’t know what more to do, than what I’m doing to show and prove that my life has
value,” she recently wrote. “But does it really matter that I think it does? When I have zero
confidence that there would be any consequence if someone did harm me. ... In my skin, I
don’t hear the clinking of my gold medals, they aren’t badges of my value, or shields from
racism.”

The day she completed her first mile run — as a sprinter, she doesn’t train distances —
she came home and saw the video that led authorities to arrest two men for killing jogger
Ahmaud Arbery in Glynn County, Ga., three months after Arbery died. “It really shook
me,” Bartoletta said. In her blog she wrote, “I went from excitement about getting back
out there another day to try to lower my mile time to feeling dejected that my skin color
gives me permission to do nothing and others permission to hurt me.”

Hollow promises and platitudes about injustice have become stale. During a conference call
last week among USA Track and Field athletes and the U.S. Olympic and Paralympic Com-
mittee, athletes criticized the USOPC’s hypocrisy in tweeting that it “stands with those
who demand equality and equal treatment” after the organization reprimanded hammer
thrower Gwen Berry and put her on probation for raising a fist on the medal stand at the
Pan Am Games last year. It similarly penalized fencer Race Imboden for kneeling on the
medal stand.

“We were able to communicate emotionally but calmly to say why this was such an impor-
tant issue for us,” Bartoletta said.

The International Olympic Committee, which has banned taking a knee or raising a fist or
otherwise breaking protocol at medal ceremonies, this week agreed to hear proposals from
its Athletes’ Commission on how athletes “can express their support for the principles en-
shrined in the Olympic charter,” but didn’t promise to relax its stance against protests.
Hypocrisy reigns there too.

“They believe that it shouldn’t be a political arena while basically capitalizing off the com-
mercialization of the entire ideals that they’re supposed to have,” Bartoletta said. “Hope-
fully we can get them back in that direction, to the ideals.”

Her own ideals remain strong. “It’s clear as day that all lives don’t matter the same. And
the struggle is getting people who are unaffected by others’ lives not mattering the same ...
give a damn about that enough to help us get to the point where all of our lives do all actu-
ally matter. And matter the same,” she wrote in a June 1 blog post. “I don’t want to have to
talk about this. Or write about this. But come on, we’ve gotta meet the moment. And this is
the moment we are in.”

She has prepared for this moment since she brought home a fourth-grade progress report
with an F in algebra and feared she’d be scolded by her mother, a banker. Instead, her
mother delivered a life lesson. “She stopped me and said, ‘I have to tell you, this is com-
pletely unacceptable. You have to be twice as good to get the same consideration,’ ” Barto-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200612/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Gold medalist's f ight for equality

letta said. “She said, ‘You’re not only Black, you’re female, so this is unacceptable. You
can’t make it in this world not even average. You have to be exceptional.’ And so from that
moment forward, I became an honors student, AP student, dean’s list in college.

“T will never forget that conversation. ‘You are Black. Not only are you Black, you’re fe-
male, and that’s like being behind two eight balls. You have to be exceptional,’ and that re-
ally helped me for my mind-set today.”

Watch her. Read her words. Listen to her voice, and those of her peers, as they run toward a
more equitable future.

‘In my skin, I don’t hear the clinking of my gold medals, they aren’t badges of my value, or
shields from racism.’ —Tianna Bartoletta

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200612/page/1/textview 3/3
