2020. 6. 17. Caution before NHL can return

Caution before NHL can return

Cautious plan allows up to six players at a time to work out at facilities in
early June.

Los Angeles Times - 26 May 2020 - A1 - By Helene Elliott

League’s next phase allows up to six players to work out at facilities in June.

The NHL and NHL Players’ Assn. issued a careful and sobering plan for the next phase of a
return to play, vowing to put the health of players and club personnel first but acknowl-
edging the joint directive regarding reopening clubs’ training facilities to small groups of
players and requiring temperature checks, enhanced sanitary procedures and other mea-
sures “while very comprehensive, cannot mitigate all risk” of contracting COVID-19.

In a 22-page document released early Monday, the league and the union said the next
phase in resuming operations will begin in early June and will be in effect for an undeter-
mined amount of time. The NHL paused its season on March 12 because of the coronavirus
outbreak. Last week, they agreed on the general outline of a 24team playoff format and
agreed to continue negotiating specific terms of the revised format for the Stanley Cup
playoffs. Five members of the Ottawa Senators and three members of the Colorado
Avalanche are known to have tested positive for COVID-19.

Under the terms of the Phased Return to Sport Protocol, a maximum of six players will be
allowed in a club’s practice facility at one time in addition to a limited number of desig-
nated club personnel. Not all club personnel will be permitted to interact with players.
Anyone who plans to visit a club training facility must undergo testing 48 hours in advance
and receive a negative result.

All club personnel must participate in a remote educational meeting before Phase 2 begins,
and all players will undergo a medical examination that checks for “any co-morbidities
that may carry increased risk with COVID-19 infection” before participating in any activi-
ties.

Clubs were told to contact local health authorities to determine whether asymptomatic
players and personnel are eligible for such tests, “provided that doing so does not take
testing resources away from Publicly Necessary Testing.” If testing isn’t available, players
and personnel would have to self-quarantine for 14 days before they could use training fa-
cilities, unless they can certify they had already served a 14-day quarantine.

Those who want to use club facilities must undergo temperature checks not more than two
hours before they enter the facility and each club must administer a temperature check at
the entrance to the facility.

Those who develop symptoms of the novel coronavirus will be classified as unfit to play
and won’t be permitted to practice or play. Clubs would have to carry out contact tracing.
An isolated case wouldn’t lead to “widescale” quarantine of a club, but anyone who came
into contact with a player who tested positive is subject to testing.

Some players who traveled overseas to wait out the suspension of play might be required to
spend 14 days in self-quarantine if local authorities have imposed that rule.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200526/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Caution before NHL can return

“Even if not imposed by the local health authorities, such individuals returning to the
Club’s home city by public transportation, including commercial air or rail travel must
serve a 14day self quarantine period post-travel before engaging in training activities at
their club’s facility,” the memo said. “In addition, Club Medical personnel may impose a
14-day quarantine on Players and permitted Personnel returning to the Club’s home city
from a high-risk environment, even if they are not traveling via public transportation.”
The memo — which was signed by NHL deputy commissioner Bill Daly, senior vice presi-
dent and deputy general counsel Julie Grand and chief medical officer Dr. Willem
Meeuwisse — said a list of high-risk environments will be given to clubs after the league
and NHLPA consult. Teams are not permitted to require that players who are sheltering in
place somewhere other than their team’s home city return in time to participate in Phase
2.

The protocol calls for voluntary noncontact skates with no coaches or skating coaches or
other club employees participating. Players who participate in Phase 2 won't be allowed to
work out or skate at other locations. Physical distancing will be required in the locker room
and weight room. In addition, the protocol said, “Players shall be encouraged to shower at
home wherever possible,” and they must leave their workout clothes and anything they
used during their workout at the facility.

At each session only one athletic trainer, one strength and conditioning coach, one equip-
ment manager, up to two locker room attendants, one team physician and one goalie coach
are permitted to be present. Players won’t be permitted to use hot and cold tubs, saunas, or
steam rooms and they have been advised not to carpool or take public transportation to a
club facility.

Shared meals are banned but teams can provide prepackaged individual meals that players
can take home with them. Massage therapists, agents, chiropractors, players’ family
members and media are among those prohibited from entering club facilities during Phase
2. All personnel must wear face coverings except while exercising.

Updated cleaning and disinfecting procedures will be observed by each team before their
facilities reopen.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200526/page/1/textview 2/2
