2020. 6. 17. Trump is attacking Twitter policies. There could be repercussions.

Trump is attacking Twitter policies. There could be repercus-
sions.

The platform’s moderating policies are both unusually subjective and no-
tably principled.

Los Angeles Times - 30 May 2020 - A1 - By Suhauna Hussain and Jeff Bercovici

When Twitter slapped a warning label over President Trump’s tweet Thursday night about
riots in Minnesota’s Twin Cities, the company’s official explanation was that the president
had violated a rule prohibiting “glorification of violence.” But that justification doesn’t
explain why Twitter chose to leave the tweet on the site for people to see, or why it blocked
the ability to write replies, or why past tweets seemingly breaking the same rule were al-
lowed to stand unaltered.

To understand those decisions, you would have to know Twitter’s other rules. There are
plenty of them.

Along with other large social media services, Twitter has evolved over the years from a
free-speech, free-fire zone into something more regulated in response to commercial
concerns, government pressure and user complaints. Like Facebook, Instagram, Reddit
and Pinterest, it has been frequently compelled by events to update its policies on harass-
ment, hate speech, misinformation and election interference, among other issues.

Under Chief Executive Jack Dorsey, Twitter has taken a unique approach to that task,
erecting a framework that rests on homegrown concepts and definitions. Through an ap-
proach that is more nuanced than those of its competitors, the company has sought to
portray itself as upholding free speech while also embracing values like inclusivity and hu-
man dignity.

While its rules may appear to prescribe specific responses to specific transgressions, in
practice, the subjectivity involved in interpreting and balancing the various edicts gives
the company leeway to make ad hoc judgment calls — as the White House learned not once
but twice this week.

On Monday, the company affixed a note to a pair of Trump’s tweets about mail-in ballots.
“Get the facts,” it said, linking to a list of statements that dismantled the president’s
claims. It was the first time Twitter had applied a fact-check label to one of Trump’s
tweets.

Twitter said it has previously used the warning label for Brazilian politician Osmar Terra,
who tweeted in April that quarantining increases the spread of the coronavirus.

The warning on Trump’s Thursday tweet, which implied that protesters in Minneapolis
could be shot, was the first time Twitter has deemed him afoul of the violence-glorifica-
tion rule, despite earlier episodes such as engaging in nuclear sword-rattling with North
Korea.

“The tweet violates our policies regarding the glorification of violence based on the histor-
ical context of the last line, its connection to violence and the risk it could inspire similar
actions today,” a Twitter spokesperson said in a statement.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200530/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Trump is attacking Twitter policies. There could be repercussions.

While that sounds cut and dried, Twitter has given itself room to maneuver with a parallel
policy that allows “public-interest exceptions” for rule-breaking tweets from politicians
and other government figures. Twitter’s description of that policy details a lengthy list of
factors that weigh in applying the exemption and handling tweets that receive it.

“A critical function of our service is providing a place where people can openly and publicly
respond to their leaders and hold them accountable,” Twitter wrote in a blog post in June
2019.

The company expanded on the policy in October, saying it would enforce rules for any ac-
count engaging in promotion of terrorism, threats of violence or posting of private infor-
mation, for example.

“We want to make it clear today that the accounts of world leaders are not above our poli-
cies entirely,” the company blog post read.

Platforms that are influencer-focused have difficulty understanding how to treat high-
profile figures relative to average users, said Kat Lo, a researcher who studies online mod-
eration at the nonprofit Meedan. In giving itself tools besides account deactivation and
post removal, Twitter has made its rules substantially more enforceable, she said.

With Facebook — which also owns Instagram and WhatsApp — signaling its reluctance to
pass judgment on Trump’s public utterance, “this is, in fact, Twitter distinguishing them-
selves from other social media companies in a big way,” Lo said.

Still, the fact that Twitter hasn’t taken action on a Trump tweet until now shows that the
company has reservations of its own about taking on @realdonaldtrump and his loud and
loyal followers. With Trump ordering the executive branch to reexamine the rules Twitter
and its competitors rely on to do business, the costs of confrontation are clear (even if that
executive order is more threat than punishment).

“On the same day that they decided to fact-check a tweet about absentee ballots, they de-
cided not to factcheck a tweet insinuating that a reporter the president doesn’t like is re-
sponsible for a murder,” noted Renée DiResta, technical research manager at the Stanford
Internet Observatory. “So the application of the policy is still not an indication that every-
thing President Trump says will be factchecked.”

‘On the same day that they decided to fact-check a tweet about absentee ballots, they de-
cided not to fact-check a tweet insinuating that a reporter the president doesn’t like is re-
sponsible for a murder.’ — Renée DiResta, Stanford Internet Observatory

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200530/page/1/textview 2/2
