2020. 6. 17. Cannes releases what-if f ilm list

Cannes releases what-if f ilm list

While the event has been canceled, films by Wes Anderson, Steve McQueen
and more will still receive the prestigious label

Los Angeles Times - 4 Jun 2020 - A1 - JUSTIN CHANG

While the storied fest has been canceled, it has selected the films that still can carry its ’20
label.

 

It’s been a remarkable season of ups and downs for the world’s most prestigious film fes-
tival.

The Festival de Cannes’ 2019 edition was hailed as one of its strongest in years, with the
premieres of much-lauded titles including “Pain and Glory,” “Portrait of a Lady on Fire,”
“Once Upon a Time in ... Hollywood,” “Atlantics” and the South Korean thriller “Para-
site,” which won the Palme d’Or, the festival’s top prize.

Nine months later, “Parasite” clinched the Academy Award for best picture, becoming the
first film to pull off that twofer since “Marty” (1955) and marking a rare symbolic conver-
gence between Hollywood and the global film industry. Awards-season cachet isn’t every-
thing, but it was still a striking turnaround for Cannes, which many in the industry had be-
gun to discount as a significant Oscar launchpad next to its better-positioned rival festi-
vals like Venice,

Telluride and Toronto.

Anticipation was thus running higher than usual for Cannes 2020. That event was origi-
nally scheduled to take place May 12-23, with the director Spike Lee presiding over the
competition jury. Wes Anderson’s “The French Dispatch,” Paul Verhoeven’s “Benedetta,”
Sofia Coppola’s “On the Rocks” and the Pixar animation “Soul” were among the major ti-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200604/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. Cannes releases what-if f ilm list

tles widely expected to premiere on the Croisette, the storied boulevard that runs along the
beach through the French Riviera town.

But then came a startling reversal of fortune, as the festival was forced to postpone and
then finally cancel its 2020 edition in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic. It was the first
such major Cannes disruption since 1968, a year of sweeping political unrest that brought
the festivities to a screeching halt.

Under the artistic direction of its delegate general, Thierry Frémaux, Cannes deferred its
cancellation announcement for as long as possible. Even as other major events like South
by Southwest and Tribeca

pulled the plug, Cannes organizers remained optimistic about hosting some version of the
festival later in the summer. But as the pandemic worsened and the French government
extended its ban on all largescale gatherings, it became clear the show simply could not go
on.

Now, at least, we have an idea of what the show would have been. On Wednesday evening
in Paris, Frémaux and the festival’s president, Pierre Lescure, unveiled a list of 56 films
that had been chosen for the event’s official selection (which encompasses films that play
in competition as well as sidebar sections including Un Certain Regard, midnight screen-
ings, special screenings and out of competition).

It’s not exactly a picture of what the festival would have looked like without COVID-19.
Some titles that may have played Cannes this year have instead opted to wait until next
year (with Verhoeven’s film reportedly on that list), while others were removed from con-
sideration as their backers set their sights on other events.

However, in the absence of a physical gathering, all 56 films in the official selection will
now receive a Cannes 2020 label, a badge of honor that will accompany them to their pre-
mieres at later dates and possibly other festivals partnering with Cannes, including Tel-
luride, Toronto, San Sebastian and New York.

The first and least surprising title on Frémaux’s list was “The French Dispatch,” Ander-
son’s ensemble comedy set in the French foreign bureau of a Kansas newspaper, which
conceivably would have brought Benicio Del Toro, Tilda Swinton, Léa Seydoux, Bill Mur-
ray, Timothée Chalamet and other actors to the festival’s red-carpeted steps. The Search-
light Pictures release was originally scheduled to open July 24 in the U.S. but will now be
released Oct. 16.

Another postponed title receiving the Cannes 2020 label is Pete Docter’s “Soul,” which
features the voice of Jamie Foxx as a middleschool music teacher who has an out-of-body
experience. Co-directed by Kemp Powers and originally due this month but now set to
open Nov. 20 through Disney, “Soul” would have marked the third consecutive Cannes se-
lection for Docter. His previous Pixar features, “Up” and “Inside Out,” launched to great
success with out-of-competition premieres on the Croisette.

One Cannes 2020 selection likely to stir considerable excitement wherever it ends up is
“Ammonite,” a 19th century love story starring Kate Winslet and Saoirse Ronan. It’s the
second feature and the second LGBT romance from the English director Francis Lee after
his muchacclaimed debut, “God’s Own Country.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200604/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. Cannes releases what-if f ilm list

The Oscar-winning British filmmaker Steve McQueen (“12 Years a Slave,” “Widows”) had
a remarkable two new features selected for Cannes 2020, both titles from his BBC/Amazon
anthology series. They are “Lovers Rock,” a love story set at a blues party in the early
1980s, and “Mangrove,” an account of the Mangrove Nine, a group of British black ac-
tivists who were arrested in 1970 after demonstrating against police harassment.
Frémaux acknowledged “Mangrove’s” particular resonance in light of recent headlines,
and, in a statement released for the festival’s announcement, McQueen dedicated both
films “to George Floyd and all the other black people that have been murdered, seen or un-
seen, because of who they are.”

Along with Anderson, Docter and McQueen, other Cannes alumni who would have returned
to the festival this year included France’s Francois Ozon, with “Eté 85,” and Maiwenn,
with “DNA”; Japan’s Naomi Kawase with “True Mothers”; Denmark’s Thomas Vinterberg
with “Another Round”; Spain’s Fernando Trueba with “Forgotten

We’ll Be”; Lithuania’s Sharunas Bartas with “In the Dusk”; Belgium’s Lucas Belvaux with
“Home Front”; Japan’s Koji Fukada with “The Real Thing”; and the U.S.’ Jonathan Nos-
siter with “Last Words.”

Following the success of “Parasite” at a festival that has always paid strong attention to
South Korean cinema, Frémaux also announced the selection of two Korean pictures: Im
Sang-soo’s “Heaven: To the Land of Happiness” and Yeon Sang-ho’s “Peninsula,” a fol-
low-up to his hit 2016 zombie thriller, “Train to Busan.”

Under normal circumstances, the press conference announcing the Cannes official selec-
tion lineup is an exciting, noisy and sometimes contentious affair. Journalists usually pep-
per Frémaux with questions about the glaring omissions of any films from this or that
country, and about the absence of titles that were widely expected to have made the cut.
Wednesday’s live-streamed announcement proved quieter and more bittersweet, partly
because the lineup was a purely theoretical one and partly because of COVID-19 physical
distancing restrictions. No reporters were in attendance, which meant there were none of
the usual questions and criticisms that have consistently greeted the Cannes selection.
Journalists have hammered Frémaux and his selection committee in recent years for the
routinely low percentage of women directors who are chosen for the main competition.
Those criticisms have only grown in intensity with the rise of the #MeToo movement —
which began partly in response to the allegations against Harvey Weinstein, a longtime
regular at Cannes — and the light it has shed on gender inequality throughout the film in-
dustry. (In 2018, Cannes committed to the 5050 x 2020 Pledge, promising to make strides
for gender parity and greater transparency.)

The number of women directors who would have had films in competition this year is un-
known, but 13 of the 56 films listed, or about 23%, feature a female director. That percent-
age falls to about 20% if you consider that there are 64 directors named in the official se-
lection, and 51 of them are men. (The reason for the discrepancy is that several films have
multiple directors, including the omnibus film “Septet: The Story of Hong Kong,” which is
credited to six directors, only one of whom, Ann Hui, is a woman.)

Cannes is regularly criticized for its longtime loyalty to “usual suspect” auteurs, some-
times at the expense of new talent. But the festival has made a strong effort to right that

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200604/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. Cannes releases what-if f ilm list

balance in recent years with a greater focus on younger, less established filmmakers,
among them Mati Diop (“Atlantics”) and Ladj Ly (“Les Misérables”), who both won major
prizes at Cannes last year.

In keeping with that commitment, the festival will grant labels to 18 features from first-
time directors, including France’s Charléne Favier (“Slalom”), Armenia’s Nora Mar-
tirosyan (“Si le Vent Tombe (Should the Wind Fall)”), the U.S.’ Pascual Sisto (“John and
the Hole”), China’s Wei Shujun (“Striding Into the Wind”) and Israel’s Dani Rosenberg
(“The Death of Cinema and My Father Too”).

Cannes 2020 would have hosted the international premieres of Michael Dweck and Gregory
Kershaw’s well-regarded documentary, “The Truffle Hunters,” and Viggo Mortensen’s
directing debut, “Falling,” in which he also stars. Both films premiered earlier this year at
Sundance, one of the few 2020 festivals to go off without a hitch before the pandemic.
Cannes’ reluctance to cancel even in the wake of a global health crisis became its own
magnet for ridicule in recent months, cited as the latest evidence that the festival is an ar-
rogant monolith, stubbornly wedded to tradition and protocol in a fastchanging media en-
vironment. Well before the pandemic, industry observers took Cannes to task for its ongo-
ing refusal to allow Netflix films to play in competition, due to rules requiring that compe-
tition titles play afterward in French theaters. (The streaming giant responded to the com-
petition ban by skipping Cannes in 2018 and 2019. And though Frémaux recently told trade
publication Screen International that Lee’s upcoming Netflix film “Da 5 Bloods” would
have been an out-ofcompetition premiere this year, it was not included in the official se-
lection announcement.)

While Cannes’ enormous film market is planning a virtual edition this year so as to keep
business flowing during the pandemic, Frémaux has said that he never seriously consid-
ered the idea of taking the festival digital. That dogged commitment to the theatrical expe-
rience may mark Cannes as something of a dinosaur, but it has also marked it as one of the
industry’s last remaining cultural and technological standard bearers. And that still means
something: While it remains to be seen how the Cannes 2020 films fare on their own, the
label will almost certainly ensure more than the usual media and industry attention as
these films make their way into the outside world.

Frémaux noted on Wednesday that despite this year’s unprecedented disappointment and
upheaval, many had expressed gratitude that he and his organizers hadn’t given up on
Cannes so easily.

‘“‘We’re very much touched by the signs of affection,” he said before joking, “We’ve de-
cided to call off next year’s festival. We get more compliments when we cancel.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200604/page/1/textview 4/4
