2020. 6. 17. Stimulus spending spree in S. Korea

Stimulus spending spree in S. Korea

Coronavirus money winds its way through the sagging economy of a pro-
vincial capital.

Los Angeles Times - 10 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Victoria Kim

CHUNCHEON, South Korea — Choi Moon-soon fanned out his wad of coronavirus stimu-
lus money for the cameras = a gambler flaunting hundred-dollar bills.

 

He navigated the narrow aisles of a market in Gangwon province, walking between stalls
stacked high with socks, hats and kitchen wares that in recent months had gathered dust.
Cameras flashed with his every step. An entourage of dozens followed.

Choi — the provincial governor — was ready to drop some dough.

Gangwon, a mountainous land in the northeast of South Korea, was largely spared the
coronavirus outbreak that has wreaked havoc around the world — but its tourism-depen-
dent economy was not. Ranks of Japanese and Chinese visiting filming sites for Korean
dramas evaporated overnight, as did the weekend travelers from Seoul that account for
much of the area’s income.

Having mostly contained

the virus earlier than other countries, South Korea is turning its attention to recovery and
fixing months of economic devastation, while still struggling to stem smaller cluster out-
breaks. Like governments elsewhere, including the U.S., the country handed out cash stim-
ulus payments to most citizens to revive frozen local economies.

Choi, a former broadcast journalist in his 10th year as governor, had over the decades left
the household shopping to his wife. But now he wanted to lead by example to encourage
residents to spend.

So on a recent Monday, with reporters and bureaucrats in tow, he put on a suit jacket and
went shopping.

The governor strolled into a pharmacy in the provincial capital and picked out a few face
masks. He then sheepishly pointed to his thinning hair.

“T’ve been wanting to try hair growth stimulants because I have hair loss,” Choi told the
pharmacist behind the counter.

Lee Jong-ho, the 78-yearold pharmacist with a wispy crown a tad sparser than the gover-
nor’s, suggested a product he uses — about $20 a box. Choi bought a box, as did another
government official in his entourage also with a receding hairline.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200610/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Stimulus spending spree in S. Korea

Lee and his wife had been running the pharmacy at the entrance to Jungang Market in
downtown Chuncheon for 40 years. But as corporate retailers grew to dominate and online
shopping became the norm, the historic market built by the U.S. military during the
Korean War — once called “Yankee Market” by locals — was increasingly forgotten, ex-
cept among graying regulars.

Then came the coronavirus. Foot traffic vanished.

Across Gangwon, sales for small businesses were down by 70% at the lowest point in late
April.

Lee’s pharmacy stayed busy with a surge in demand for masks. But not much else. People
had largely stopped going to hospitals for anything other than the coronavirus, which
meant he was selling virtually no prescription medication. His profits tumbled.

When South Koreans started receiving the stimulus payments in May — about $830 fora
family of four, which can be used only at small businesses — he saw an uptick in cus-
tomers. Some splurged on pricey dietary supplements as a gift for elderly parents, he said.
When Lee and his wife got their stimulus payments, though, they thought they didn’t need
the money.

They’d fared better than most of their neighbors. They donated it to Mary’s Home, a shel-
ter for pregnant girls and women.

Sister Martha Park walked through the halls of Mary’s Home with a drooling baby at her
hip.

The coronavirus kept volunteers and new residents out of the home for months — one in-
fection among the young mothers, babies and nuns living together in the three-story
home would have been catastrophic.

In recent weeks, Park and her fellow Sisters of the Good Shepherd debated among them-
selves what to do with their stimulus checks. Having taken vows of poverty, they had little
need for consumer goods. Should they forgo the payments, returning the money to the
government? Should they donate the funds?

They decided to pool their payments to buy goods for those in need. They bought detergent
and canned food for single mothers who once lived in the home. They sent money to fellow
Good Shepherd sisters working with domestic violence victims or migrant farmworkers,
who don’t receive stimulus checks because they’ re foreign.

“These are people who struggle even in the best of times,” she said.

Stacked in the entryway to the home were boxes of diapers from priests in the Chuncheon
area, who gathered their stimulus funds to buy baby supplies and rice for the home.

With the donation from the pharmacist and his wife, in late May, Park took a single mother
with a 7-monthold baby shopping for kitchen goods for her new home. The mother was
about to start work at a factory and had moved into transitional housing. But her cup-
boards were bare.

At Yoohan Total Kitchen, a large kitchenware store across a stream from the home, the
young mother and the nun picked out everything she’d be needing for herself and her
young son: plates, pots, cutting boards.

“She’s starting anew with her child,” Park said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200610/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Stimulus spending spree in S. Korea

Half of the customers at Yu Han-yeul’s namesake store, which sells items including
kitchenware utensils and industrial-sized vats, own restaurants.

Much of the restaurant business in this town is dependent on weekend travelers from
Seoul, an hour’s train ride away. Even though South Korea never imposed mandatory busi-
ness closures, for weeks no one was traveling. Several of Yu’s regulars went bankrupt.
Yu’s business was down by about half at the worst of it. The stimulus checks — which are
required to be spent locally by Aug. 31 — came just as he was starting to fret about rent and
his monthly inventory bills.

“It’s free money,” he said. “But it’s only temporary.”

South Korea is considering additional rounds of cash handouts, after 99% of eligible
households accepted the payments, at a cost to the government of about $11 billion — part
of about $200 billion in stimulus spending to jump-start the economy.

Even so, Yu was bracing for a long path to recovery.

“If there’s another outbreak in the fall, it’1l all be downhill,” he said. “We're not in the
clear.”

His family’s stimulus funds went to clothes and school goods for his kids. His Hyundai
Porter truck, which he uses to make deliveries, was in need of new wheels.

Yu took his truck into Yoohan Motors in downtown Chuncheon. His go-to mechanic for
years, Jang Piluk had seen his sales go up by 15% to 20% during the epidemic. He provides
oil changes and other maintenance at a cut-rate price — “bait,” he said, to get customers
to buy tires or other parts.

“It’s because we’re cheap,” said Jang, who said his prices are about 30% lower than aver-
age. “When life is hard, people flock to places that are cheap.”

In less than a month, Jang had blown through his stimulus check, mostly at restaurants
with friends and business contacts. He went to Hoeyeonglu, a famed Taiwanese restaurant
across the street from his shop, five times on stimulus funds.

Yu Tehchia, the restaurant’s second-generation owner-chef, was still waiting for his
check. As a Taiwanese national and permanent resident, he was eligible but had to file ex-
tra paperwork.

He had felt the impact of the stimulus cash at the restaurant, which opened five decades
ago and is one of the town’s oldest establishments. But business is still down by 20% to
30%. Much of his clientele used to come from groups of workers from nearby City Hall and
provincial headquarters. They have yet to return.

A few times a year, Gov. Choi used to drop in — but not since the coronavirus.

“People are going to burn through it so quickly, in a couple weeks,” said Yu, the chef.
“People spend money when there’s hope.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200610/page/1/textview 3/3
