2020. 6. 17. More reopenings as cases surge

More reopenings as cases surge

Newsom says state is better prepared for an increase

Los Angeles Times - 11 Jun 2020 - A1- By Colleen Shalby

Arise is expected as lockdowns ease, but state is better prepared, governor says.

  

California continues to see a surge in coronavirus cases, an expected consequence as stay-
at-home orders implemented to stem the spread of the illness are lifted and more sectors
of the economy reopen.

Los Angeles County announced on Wednesday that gyms and fitness facilities, pro-league
arenas without audiences, day camps, museums, galleries, zoos, aquariums, camp-
grounds, outdoor recreational areas and hotels for leisure travel will be allowed to reopen
Friday.

Nail salons, tattoo shops, bars and wineries, movie theaters, live performance theaters,
entertainment centers, concert halls and venues, stadiums, arenas, gaming facilities,
theme parks and festivals are still closed in the county.

The further reopening comes as 1,275 new cases and an additional 61 deaths linked to
COVID-19 were reported by L.A. County public health officials.

Despite lifted restrictions, parties, gatherings and mixing of households are still not al-
lowed.

“No, we are completely not out of the woods, we are still in in the middle of the woods and
we still have a lot of risk,” Public Health Director Barbara Ferrer said. “I know how desper-
ate people are to get be able to get back to events but that is not in our health officer order
nor is it in the state health officer order.”

On Tuesday, for the second day in a row, the state reported more than 3,000 cases, bring-
ing the total number of infections to over 137,000. The bulk of cases are still in L.A County.
Despite the upward trajectory of

cases and a growing death toll, there are no plans to reverse course, officials said.

“As we phase in, in a responsible way, a reopening of the economy, we’ve made it abun-
dantly clear that we anticipate an increase in the total number of positive cases,” Gov.
Gavin Newsom said Tuesday while speaking with Oakland community leaders.

“But we’ve also made it abundantly clear the concurrent recognition and commitment that
we are in a substantially different place than we were 90 days ago. We have hundreds of
millions of masks now in our possession.”

The governor pointed to the state’s increased testing ability, hospital capacity and an
available supply of ventilators — key metrics in the decision to ease statewide modifica-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/202006 11/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. More reopenings as cases surge

tions — as reasoning for pressing ahead.

Newsom said significant progress in the battle against the virus has been made since the
pandemic erupted in the United States this year, “from a human resource perspective, hu-
man capital perspective, a physical capital perspective, a PPE perspective.”

Ten counties — Fresno, Imperial, Kings, Tulare, San Bernardino, San Joaquin,

Los Angeles, Santa Clara, Sacramento and Ventura — are being monitored for an increase
in the number of transmissions or hospitalizations. A spike in numbers has been linked to
outbreaks in jails, prisons and skilled nursing facilities as well as informal and formal
gatherings over the last two weeks, according to the California Department of Public
Health.

As restrictions have been lifted after nearly three months of quarantine, personal reunions
have begun, despite an ongoing prohibition of gatherings beyond political protests or wor-
ship services.

In Sacramento County, a surge in hospitalizations over the weekend were linked to mem-
bers of the same household who gathered recently for birthday parties and a funeral. Dr.
Olivia Kasirye, the county’s health officer, said many people think “we’re out of the
woods,” despite the reality.

Ventura County, among the first to ease coronavirus restrictions in Southern California,
saw a similar surge in hospitalizations over the weekend, from 21 on Friday to 43 on Mon-
day. There are currently 39 individuals who are hospitalized, 12 of whom are in intensive
care.

The statewide surge in the number of COVID-19 cases does not include any potential
spread from protests in the aftermath of George Floyd’s death, as the incubation period for
the virus can take up to 14 days. But officials fear the demonstrations will lead to another
jump in case count.

While many at the protests have worn face coverings, it is near impossible to keep a six-
foot distance in the crowds. Officials are encouraging anyone who participated to get
tested and to self-quarantine if they were potentially exposed to someone who is infected.
State officials are working with county leaders to assess whether their jurisdictions are
ready to move further into the reopening stage.

In L.A. County, the state’s most populous, officials are monitoring the positivity rate to
spot signs of an increase in transmission.

Additionally, state officials are providing more resources and personal protective equip-
ment to the county’s 235 skilled nursing facilities, where the testing of staff and residents
has become a priority after prior scrutiny.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/202006 11/page/1/textview 2/2
