2020. 6. 17. CONTINUED UNREST IN MINNEAPOLIS

CONTINUED UNREST IN MINNEAPOLIS

Comments of top cops in L.A. and elsewhere highlight effects of reform
movements.

Los Angeles Times - 29 May 2020 - A1 - By James Queally and Molly Hennessy-Fiske Queally reported from Los Angeles
and Hennessy-Fiske from Minneapolis. The Associated Press contributed to this report.

People feed a fire outside a Target store in Minneapolis during a protest over the death of
George Floyd. Even police chiefs of major U.S. cities are condemning the officer who knelt
on Floyd’s neck.

 

 

MINNEAPOLIS — As footage of George Floyd begging for help while he died under the knee
of a Minneapolis police officer continued to stoke outrage across the country, the chorus of
voices condemning the killing was joined by unfamiliar allies.

Leaders of some of the largest police departments in the U.S. have spoken out this week
against the officer at the center of the video, criticizing not only his tactics but also fellow
officers who might seek to justify Floyd’s death. It was a rare moment when police leaders
were unequivocal in their public disdain for the conduct of one of their own.

New York City Police Commissioner Dermot Shea said Thursday that the officer’s actions
were “deeply disturbing.” Los Angeles Police Chief Michel Moore said the footage tar-
nished others who wear a badge and tore “at the very fabric of race relations in this coun-
try.”

Over the last two days, L.A. County Sheriff Alex Villanueva, Houston Police Chief Art
Acevedo and the heads of police agencies in half a dozen other cities across the U.S. have
bluntly criticized the actions of Minneapolis Police Officer Derek Chauvin.

“There is no need to see more video. There [is] no need to wait to see how ‘it plays out.’
There is no need to put a knee on someone’s neck for NINE minutes,” Chattanooga, Tenn.,
Police Chief David Roddy tweeted Wednesday. “There IS a need to DO something. If you
wear a badge and you don’t have an issue with this ... turn it in.”

In years past, police brass might have asked for the public’s patience during similar con-
troversies or offered a refrain about the footage not telling the entire story. But law en-
forcement experts and criminal justice activists believe the visceral depiction of Floyd’s

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200529/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. CONTINUED UNREST IN MINNEAPOLIS

death — a black man beneath the knee of a white officer — and years of demonstrations
following officer-involved killings made it palatable to call out blatant misconduct.

“T think Black Lives Matter has to take credit for the consistency in which we have re-
minded people that black death is unacceptable, even by the police. I think there was a
community response to Eric Garner, but there wasn’t a political response,” said Patrisse
Cullors, co-founder of Black Lives Matter. “Now that there’s been seven years of consis-
tent fight back and resistance and challenge, I think people are changing. I think people’s
minds are changing, hearts are changing.”

Floyd’s deadly encounter with police began Monday night after he was accused of trying to
use a counterfeit $20 bill at a grocery store.

Cellphone video of Floyd’s arrest outside the business shows Chauvin driving his knee into
the 46year-old’s neck as Floyd pleads that he can’t breathe. After several minutes, Floyd
appears to lose consciousness and a bystander can be heard yelling that Floyd’s nose is
bleeding. Even as paramedics arrive to check Floyd’s pulse, Chauvin’s knee remains posi-
tioned on the man’s neck.

In an interview Thursday, Moore said the gruesome nature of the video was part of the
reason he felt compelled to speak out.

“The technique, the visual of an individual on the ground, apparently not offering resis-
tance, expressing in an ongoing persistent fashion that he can’t breathe, that he’s having
difficulties breathing,” Moore said. “He’s in despair. He’s in duress.”

Although it’s rare for sitting police chiefs to so openly criticize the actions of an officer in-
volved in a controversial on-duty killing, it’s not unheard of. In 2016, then-LAPD Chief
Charlie Beck called on Los Angeles

County Dist. Atty. Jackie Lacey to prosecute one of his officers for the fatal shooting of a
homeless man in Venice Beach. Lacey ultimately declined to do so. Beck declined to com-
ment on Floyd’s death.

Some activists noted that even the local police union had not offered the type of spirited
defense of the officers that has become commonplace during other national controversies.
It signified, at least to some, a defining event in the nation’s often disturbing racial climate
between the police and the public.

After Tamir Rice was shot and killed in Cleveland in 2014, the head of the city’s police
union described the 12-year-old as “menacing.” In the wake of Floyd’s death, Minneapolis
police union President Bob Kroll — who called Black Lives Matter a “terrorist organiza-
tion” after a prior shooting in the city, according to the Minneapolis Star Tribune — only
asked for the public to wait for the completion of an “indepth

investigation.”

Still, some observers noted, the litany of police leaders criticizing Chauvin’s actions
stopped short of calling for the officer to be prosecuted.

“There’s always that line. The line that keeps everything the same way,” said Patricia
Bynes, a former Democratic committeewoman in Ferguson, Mo., who was involved in
demonstrations after the shooting death of Michael Brown in 2014.

But Bynes also believes sustained demonstrations like those in Ferguson helped create an
atmosphere drastically different from the one she faced in Missouri years ago.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200529/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. CONTINUED UNREST IN MINNEAPOLIS

“You’ve got these politically correct things, where it’s now OK to say this,” Bynes said.
“Because back in Ferguson, you didn’t even say this much about what’s going on.”

In Minneapolis, echoes of Ferguson could be felt through a chaotic night of protests that
ended with looting and buildings burning.

Demonstrators in Minneapolis have made clear that they will not accept anything short of
a prosecution.

“There is ample probable cause to arrest them. Had community members engaged in the
violence these officers engaged in, they would already have been arrested,” said Michelle
Gross, president of Communities United Against Police Brutality. “The fact that these dan-
gerous men are free to roam the streets is indicative of the special treatment they are being
given as cops.”

Twyana Balla, a 38-yearold black woman who owned one of the businesses damaged dur-
ing Wednesday’s demonstrations, said condemnations from the city’s mayor and other
national police leaders rang empty as long as Chauvin remained free, she said.

‘We’ re wondering why are you sitting home? You caused all of this,” she said.

Asked why he had upbraided the officer’s actions but stopped short of calling for a prose-
cution, Moore said he didn’t feel qualified to speak for a district attorney.

“T don’t know Minnesota law, what constitutes criminal homicide, what constitutes man-
slaughter.... That’s not my area of expertise or understanding,” he said. “What I speak
from is 38, going on 39, years of law enforcement experience .... I believe that I can see and
recognize to me what appears to be a lack of humanity, a lack of compassion.”

The police leaders speaking out from thousands of miles away and demonstrators march-
ing through Minneapolis at least seemed to agree on one thing: A life was taken for no rea-
son.

“Do not defend the undefendable, attempt to justify the unjustifiable or excuse the inex-
cusable,” Miami Police Chief Jorge Colina tweeted Thursday. “George Floyd should be alive
today.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200529/page/1/textview 3/3
