2020. 6. 17. A perilous balancing act

A perilous balancing act

Even as infection rates rise, L.A. County aims to reopen with strict safety
regulations.

Los Angeles Times - 9 Jun 2020 - A‘ - By Rong-Gong Lin II, Colleen Shalby and Iris Lee

With businesses reopening and people beginning to get back to old routines, Los Angeles
County is entering a perilous phase of the fight against the coronavirus: trying to boost the
battered economy without sparking new outbreaks.

  

One concerning sign is that the coronavirus transmission rate in Los Angeles County — the
California epicenter of COVID-19, with more than 2,600 deaths — appears to be climbing
again. The increase was reported after the county allowed many retail stores, restaurants
and churches to reopen with social distancing rules and as more people left their homes for
parks, beaches and hiking trails.

Officials said it will take a few weeks to see whether the calculated rate of disease trans-
mission has actually increased, causing hospitals to see more coronavirus patients. But
authorities also say it is still possible to strike the right balance between reopening society
and strict safety rules.

“This is not an impossible task,” Los Angeles County Public Health Director Barbara Ferrer
said Monday. “This is entirely possible: to be able to reopen and do it in a manner that
continues to slow the spread .... It’s essential that we make progress on our reopening.”

At its worst, the county’s “effective transmission rate”

of the coronavirus was quite high — 3 to 31/2 — meaning one infected person on average
transmitted the virus to 3 or 31/2 other people. That high point came in early March, before
Gov. Gavin Newsom implemented California’s stay-at-home order March 19.

Eventually, the stay-athome order worked, and the effective transmission rate fell to 1,
and then even a bit below 1. That means that, on average, each infected person was trans-
mitting the virus to less than one other person.

But on Friday, Dr. Christina Ghaly, director of health services for L.A. County, said the ef-
fective transmission rate had now risen above 1 and was gaining ground.

“If transmission has indeed increased,” she added, “then the model predicts that we will
have a continued increase in hospital patient volume over the next two to four weeks, and

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200609/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. A perilous balancing act

we would anticipate beginning to see that change happen over the coming one to two
weeks.”

Weekly coronavirus deaths in L.A. County rose for the first time since midApril. There were
284 deaths reported for the seven-day period that ended Sunday, up 12% from the previ-
ous week’s 254.

Hospitalizations for COVID-19 in Los Angeles County did not significantly decline last
week compared with the previous week. That’s the first time that has happened since hos-
pitalizations were at their peak in the last week of April. There were an average of 2,010
hospitalized patients daily last week with confirmed or suspected coronavirus infections,
down 0.1% from the previous week’s daily average of 2,012.

The number of new weekly confirmed cases is down, with 8,849 reported in the seven-day
period that ended Sunday, compared with 9,967 the week before.

Ghaly said it was possible the number of intensive care beds could become inadequate in
the next two to four weeks based on the number of available beds in daily surveys among
the county’s public and private hospitals.

“We must all do everything we can to keep the [transmission rate] from continuing to in-
crease,” Ghaly said.

Los Angeles County has seen a disproportionate share of both coronavirus deaths and
cases, which now top 64,000. That represents nearly half of the more than 133,000 cases in
California, even though L.A. County is home to just one-quarter of the state’s population.
The coronavirus toll has hit minority communities particularly hard. Black, Latino and Pa-
cific Islander residents of Los Angeles County are now twice as likely to have died from in-
fection by the coronavirus, officials said.

While officials say the rising death toll is troubling, there are some optimistic signs about
the COVID-19 fight.

Nursing home residents have made up almost half of the coronavirus deaths in Los Ange-
les County. But the number of new daily deaths among nursing home residents, while still
high, has dramatically come down in the last two weeks, Ferrer said Monday.

Ferrer credited the reduction with two changes: ramping up testing of residents and staff,
regardless of if they have symptoms, and having everyone in the facility wear appropriate
protective personal equipment, such as a surgical mask or an N95 respirator, depending on
what’s appropriate.

“That was a big change ... but it also introduced an extra layer of protection, and it has
taken a while for us to see the impact of these changes,” Ferrer said.

Last month, The Times reported that L.A. County was struggling to get everyone tested at
nursing homes in the county. L.A. County had instructed nursing homes with no cases that
they could skip testing staffers and test only 10% of residents weekly.

California health officials subsequently issued new instructions to all skilled nursing facil-
ities to test everyone, a move that overruled the more lax testing allowed by L.A. County.
The county Board of Supervisors has voted to appoint an independent inspector general to
look into the county’s oversight of nursing homes, including the health department’s slow
testing.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200609/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. A perilous balancing act

L.A. County’s case rates are high because there has been a lot of testing in the nation’s
most populous county, Ferrer said. She added that the overall rate of positive tests is
shrinking — slightly fewer than 8% of people tested for the coronavirus have been posi-
tive, but in the last seven to 14 days, the rate has declined to about 5.5%, she said.

Los Angeles County officials have defended their reopening strategy, which has been gen-
erally speedier than that of the Bay Area.

Supervisor Kathryn Barger noted at a news conference Monday that L.A. County has been a
week behind nearby counties — San Diego, Orange, Riverside, San Bernardino and Ventura
— in managing its reopening.

“Make no mistake: We are doing this in a very deliberate and cautious way, and actually
had been one step behind the surrounding counties,” Barger said.

More openings could come soon. State officials have paved the way for most California
counties outside the Bay Area, including Los Angeles, San Diego, Orange, Riverside, San
Bernardino and Ventura, to decide to reopen movie theaters and gyms as early as Friday.
The latest rise in cases cannot be linked to the thousands who have taken to the streets in
the last week to protest the police killing of George Floyd and racial inequality. The incuba-
tion period for the virus can be up to 14 days, so numbers currently reported generally re-
flect actions from previous weeks, officials have said.

That’s not to say that activities at the protests won’t affect the case count in the coming
days.

Officials have continued to commend peaceful protesters for exercising their ist Amend-
ment rights while also reminding them to remain cautious.

Ferrer on Monday said the risk of exposure at protests is the same as other crowded set-
tings where there may be people not wearing masks, including indoor malls, restaurants
and the beach. In such instances, government disease investigators won’t know that peo-
ple were in such an environment, which raises the risk of exposure to the virus.

“Nobody knows you were there,” she said. “No one will call you.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200609/page/1/textview 3/3
