2020. 6. 17. YOSEMITE REOPENS

YOSEMITE REOPENS

Los Angeles Times - 13 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Mary Forgione Times staff photographer Brian van der Brug contributed to this
report.

Paddleboarders on the frigid Merced River in Yosemite Valley on Thursday, reopening day
for the beloved national park after an 83-day shutdown because of the coronavirus crisis.

ms athe 2 i) f

    
 

Yosemite National Park reopened Thursday after an 83-day shutdown caused by the
coronavirus pandemic.

Only a few cars were lined up at 5 a.m. when gates were unlocked at the park’s south en-
trance. An hour later, a lone visitor at the usually teeming Tunnel View watched the sunrise
over Half Dome and the Sierra.

Like national parks across the country, Yosemite is taking a phased approach to reopening
and setting new rules and protocols designed to keep visitors and employees safe. Visitors
lucky enough to get in — you need a day permit, an overnight reservation or a wilderness
permit — had the park to themselves, something unthinkable on a typical June day at Cali-
fornia’s beloved national park.

On Thursday, campgrounds (only one is open) were quiet, waterfalls still held their spring
thunder, rangers wearing masks convened an outdoor visitor center, and at least one bear
and deer were seen roaming as they did during the people-free days.

“There is no place like Yosemite, and we can’t wait to welcome visitors back,” acting park
supervisor Cicely Muldoon said in a statement. “It’s going to be a different kind of
summer.”

The closure was unprecedented in the park’s 130year history. Popular landmarks such as
Glacier Point, the Mariposa Grove of Giant Sequoias in the southern part of the park,
Tuolumne Meadows, Hetch Hetchy and trails are open.

Museums and visitor centers remain closed, and park shuttles around the Valley and at
Mariposa Grove won’t operate this summer.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200613/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. YOSEMITE REOPENS

The biggest change is letting in just 1,700 vehicles a day, half the number of visitors that
usually turn up in June. That means you can’t just show up and expect to get in. On aver-
age, about 488,000 people visit Yosemite in June.

Day visitors must pay $35 for an entry pass and vehicle permit at recreation.gov. Vehicle
permits are required even for a drive through the park on Tioga Road (Highway 120), which
will open Monday. People who have overnight reservations or backcountry hiking permits
don’t need to get a vehicle permit.

Yosemite Valley Lodge, Curry Village and the Ahwahnee will reopen Saturday. Upper Pines
Campground, the only developed camping spot open in the park, is limited to 50% capac-
ity. Others campgrounds remain closed because the park doesn’t have enough staff to keep
restrooms clean and trash removed, according to Yosemite’s website. The park opened
June 5 to hikers with permits to hike Half Dome or access the wilderness.

Also, visitors are asked to follow Centers for Disease Control social distancing guidelines to
stay at least six feet from others, whether on a trail or in a parking lot, and wear a face cov-
ering when you can’t social distance (few visitors were seen wearing masks Thursday).

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200613/page/1/textview 2/2
