2020. 6. 17. GUARD TO HELP QUELL UNREST IN L.A.

GUARD TO HELP QUELL UNREST IN L.A.

Mayor Garcetti requests state troops and imposes citywide curfew as loot-
ing, vandalism stun city.

Los Angeles Times - 31 May 2020 - A1 - By Kevin Rector, Richard Winton, Dakota Smith and Leila Miller

National Guard troops deployed onto the streets of Los Angeles early Sunday morning as
looting, vandalism and violence intensified and the Police Department struggled to restore
order after two days of disorder.

The dramatic move came after a day of deteriorating conditions, as protests marking the
killing of George Floyd by Minneapolis police began peacefully but turned violent. Demon-
strators burned Los Angeles Police Department cruisers, threw objects at officers and
looted businesses, including the Apple Store and Nordstrom at the Grove shopping mall.
Some protesters even made it to Beverly Hills’ famed Rodeo Drive, where they were met by
a line of officers.

Since the protests started, Mayor Eric Garcetti and other city leaders had encouraged
peaceful expression and voiced support for the marches. But on Saturday, the mayor said
the conditions on the streets were getting dark by the hour. First, he ordered a night cur-
few for downtown L.A. Then, about an hour later, he extended it to the entire city. Less
than an hour after that, he requested the National Guard.

The last time the National Guard patrolled the streets of L.A. was during the 1992 riots,
which erupted after the police officers who beat Rodney King were found not guilty.
Compared with those riots, the events in Los Angeles Saturday were significantly less
widespread and dangerous. The protests and looting were limited Friday night and Satur-
day

morning largely to downtown Los Angeles and on Saturday afternoon and evening to the
Fairfax District.

Several police officers were hurt when protesters threw objects at them. But there have
been no fatalities. The 1992 riots swept across large swaths of Southern California and left
more than 60 people dead.

From Friday afternoon to early Saturday, police clashed with protesters across downtown,
pushing them off the 110 Freeway and getting into physical altercations. When the sun rose
Saturday, scores of businesses had been looted and merchants were adding to the losses
they already experienced because of the coronavirus shutdown.

Police and protesters spent hours in a tense standoff near the Grove, with police shooting
rubber bullets and striking demonstrators with batons while several police cars were set on
fire and other vehicles vandalized. Protesters also took over a Metro bus and climbed on its
roof to take video of police.

The large crowd first gathered at Pan Pacific Park off Beverly Boulevard, where they
chanted “defund police” and “prosecute killer cops” and waved signs at a rally organized
by Black Lives Matter and social justice group BLD PWR. The rally’s speakers called for less
public money for police departments and for schools and prisons to be overhauled.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/2020053 1/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. GUARD TO HELP QUELL UNREST IN L.A.

“We're living in the middle of an uprising,” Black Lives Matter co-founder Patrisse Cullors
told the group. “Let’s be clear: We are in an uprising for black life.”

Isabel Alvardo waved a sign reading, “Latinos for Black Lives Matter.” Alvardo, 21, lives in
Santa Clarita and drove to the L.A. rally because she is “sick and tired of waking up every
morning” to news about police killings. “I can’t compare myself to what they’re going
through,” she said, referring to African Americans. “But I’m here to support them.”

The scene turned more violent as the day wore on.

About a dozen destroyed or defaced LAPD cruisers sat parked on 3rd Street, yards from
where a loud crowd of protesters faced a row of police. The odor of charred rubber wafted
through the area. The cruisers’ windows were smashed, mirrors ripped out and the vehi-
cles’ bodies scrawled with anti-police slogans.

Protesters spray-painted “Cops and Klan go hand and hand” on the side of a Citibank on
Fairfax Avenue. Across the street, “Eat the Rich” was scrawled on the Writers Guild of
America building.

Around 6 p.m., police arrested about 20 protesters who were then loaded onto a sheriff ’s
bus. Dozens of protesters — many dressed in black and wearing masks — posed for
photos, each with a fist in the air, while standing atop a burned and graffitied car by Edin-
burgh Avenue and Beverly Boulevard.

At the Grove nearby, looters broke into the Nordstrom department store and the Apple
Store and ran off with merchandise. As looters approach two security guards outside the
Nike store, they begged them not to enter.

“We're one of you,” one guard said.

Eventually, some set a small police kiosk at the mall on fire.

Los Angeles Police Chief Michel Moore was personally leading the operation in the Fairfax
District and rushed to the Grove after the looting occurred. He said he was troubled by how
things had gotten out of control. He said he understood people’s anger and frustration but
that the city needed to pull together.

“This is not the solution,” he said, standing next to broken glass from the Nordstrom fa-
cade. “We haven’t given up on L.A., and L.A. shouldn’t give up on itself. We can pull around
this .... Policing doesn’t fix these kinds of societal problems. I need all of L.A. to step up
right now and be part of the solution.”

There appeared to be divisions among the protesters.

When a protester smashed the front window of the nearby Whole Foods on 3rd Street with
a hammer, some screamed, “Don’t do that! Please!” while others cheered.

The protesters began to clash among themselves. Some who urged peace created a barri-
cade of shopping carts around the store’s entrance to protect it, but moments later, an-
other group jumped the barricade and broke the store’s door down.

As protesters and police clashed in the Fairfax District, merchants downtown were picking
up the pieces.

People carrying brooms and plywood outnumbered people walking dogs around the city
center. And some of the dogs that were out were outfitted with tiny booties on all four paws
to protect against the broken glass that dotted most sidewalks.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200531/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. GUARD TO HELP QUELL UNREST IN L.A.

Claudia Oliveira, a board member of the Downtown Los Angeles Neighborhood Council,
showed up on Broadway with more than a dozen volunteers Saturday morning to sweep up
broken glass and scrub down walls.

A Brazilian immigrant, Oliveira grew up in Minneapolis. She said she understood the anger
and the outrage that boiled over Friday night. But she said she was frustrated that the
damage in downtown would disproportionately hurt the working class and people of color.
Most stores that were vandalized or looted are mom-and-pop stores, “immigrant-owned,
run by black and brown folks,” Oliveira said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/2020053 1/page/1/textview 3/3
