2020. 6. 17. Casinos hedge their bets

Casinos hedge their bets
Gaming is back, but restrictions mean no full house

Los Angeles Times - 25 May 2020 - Ai: By Kevin Baxter

CABAZON — Michael L. Fennell says he has spent a good portion of his 70 years gambling,
so he knows the difference between a long shot and a sure bet. And he admits his decision
to step inside a casino during a global pandemic was a bit of a gamble.
— = = E | te.
| a

   
 

 

 

“Everything we do now is a gamble,” he said after stepping away from a slot machine at
Morongo Casino Resort and Spa for a cigarette break. “We’re going through rough times
now.”

But, he added, “it feels like it’s getting back to normal.”

Morongo’s two casinos, by Interstate 10 about 30 minutes outside of Palm Springs, were
among six tribal casinos in Riverside and San Bernardino counties that partially reopened
Friday after a two-month shutdown caused by the spread of COVID-19.

Five others reopened last week in San Diego County, including Harrah’s Resort

Southern California in Valley Center. At least four more tribal casinos will be back online
this week.

Federal law allows tribes to run casinos with sovereignty, limiting the ability of the state or
other local authorities to dictate how they operate.

Nevertheless, most shut down voluntarily in midMarch, days before Gov. Gavin Newsom
issued his stay-at-home order.

With the governor now taking tentative measures

to reopen California, the casinos are out in front again — this time discarding Newsom’s
warnings that the state may still not be safe.

“It was a tough decision to open,” said Jeff L. Grubbe, tribal chairman for the Agua Caliente
Band of Cahuilla Indians, which on Friday reopened casinos in Rancho Mirage and Palm
Springs. “Ultimately, everyone wanted to make sure that as tribes open, it wasn’t business

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200525/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Casinos hedge their bets

as usual. The way we are going to open is going to look much different than when we
closed.”

That means all guests and employees at the Agua Caliente properties had their tempera-
tures checked before entering, face coverings were mandatory, and smoking was prohib-
ited.

To ensure social distancing, Grubbe said, capacity was limited to about 1,000 people in the
45,000-squarefoot Rancho Mirage casino and 700 in the smaller Palm Springs one, about
half of pre-COVID numbers.

“It’s costing a ton of money for some of these measures, and it’s worth it, because you
can’t put a price on someone getting sick,” Grubbe said.

Despite those measures — or perhaps because of them — a couple of hundred guests had
already filed into the Rancho Mirage casino by late morning Friday, about two hours after
the doors opened for the first time since March 17.

Convincing some of the employees to come back was a little tougher, Grubbe said.

“They wanted to know what we were going to do, what safety protocols we’ll have in
place,” he said. “And I get that. You don’t want to open up and not take this serious [or] do
anything to mitigate their safety. So we have an abundance of security on the floor; we
have an abundance of cleaning crews on the floor.”

For many of the 3,000 people who either are members of the tribe or are on its payroll, re-
opening the casino meant reopening a vital financial lifeline.

Although California is home to 109 federally recognized tribes, many are small, which
pushed them to the back of the line when it came to accessing the $8 billion in financial
assistance Congress

allocated for tribal governments under the CARES Act.

“So we kind of said, look, we need to do what's best for us, for our people, for our employ-
ees and kind of take control of our destiny,”

Grubbe said. “Everything seemed to be getting better as far as the [COVID-19] cases and
the deaths. And if you open up slowly — don’t go full steam ahead, but with all these safety
precautions — the time’s right.”

The casinos are hedging their bets, though, with Morongo’s two properties also requiring
guests and employees to undergo temperature checks and wear face coverings. Protective
shields were installed between slot machines and at gaming tables, said Simon Farmer,
executive director of marketing for Morongo.

“It’s honestly up to us to show everybody that we can operate safely and comfortably,”
Farmer said. “We understand that certain guests may be a little bit more apprehensive to
come back to a casino.”

Whether those measures were being strictly followed was uncertain, since reporters were
not allowed inside.

“We're all a little worried,” said Jose Garcia of Pasadena. “It’s our health.”

Still, he lined up to get into the casino, figuring it was a chance worth taking.

Morongo said it was limiting capacity on its main casino floor — at 148,000 square feet,
among the largest in California — but declined to say what the new capacity was.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200525/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Casinos hedge their bets

In any case, that number was reached by 2:30 p.m. Friday, about three hours after opening,
leaving more than a hundred people standing in line outside in 90-degree temperatures.
Southern California’s tribal casinos aren’t the first to resume business. At least eight states
— Idaho, Washington and Arizona among them — have seen some tribal properties re-
open this month, while commercial casinos have reopened in South Dakota, Louisiana,
Arkansas and Mississippi.

Las Vegas casinos, which remained closed under Phase 1 of Nevada Gov. Steve Sisolak’s
Roadmap to Recovery, could learn more about their fate Tuesday, when the state gaming
board hears from six health and safety experts. Several Las Vegas casino resorts have be-
gun accepting room reservations for stays beginning next weekend.

“We've absolutely been monitoring the impact in those areas and learning from our coun-
terparts,” Farmer said, “just reinforcing the steps that we’ve been taking and thereby re-
inforcing the decision that we’re making.”

For the Agua Caliente Band of Cahuilla Indians, the decision to reopen has proved to be a
good one, Grubbe said.

“Being limited to 50% capacity, we know we’re not going to break any records,” he said.
“But we’re going to have some revenue coming in, and people are going to start getting
paychecks again. People want to go somewhere; they want to do something. And we want
to provide them a safe, clean environment to do it.

“So as long as we have people in there, anything’s better than [being] shut down.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200525/page/1/textview 3/3
