2020. 6. 17. Atlanta rocked by fatal cop shooting

Atlanta rocked by fatal cop shooting

Police chief resigns and an officer is fired amid protests over the killing of a
Black man.

Los Angeles Times - 14 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Jenny Jarvie

ATLANTA — Atlanta’s police chief resigned Saturday, hours after an officer fatally shot a
27-year-old Black man following a scuffle when police responded to a complaint that he
had fallen asleep in the drivethrough line at a Wendy’s fast-food restaurant.

  

Late Saturday night, the officer who fired the fatal shot was fired as hundreds of protesters
blocked a downtown Atlanta connector road and faced off with police in riot gear. Scores
were arrested.

At about 10 p.m., the Wendy’s caught fire, with flames pouring out of the drive-through
window.

Earlier in the day, Atlanta Mayor Keisha Lance Bottoms said Erika Shields, who had served
as chief since December 2016, was stepping down but would remain with the department
in some capacity.

Officer Garrett Rolfe, who shot Rayshard Brooks of Atlanta late Friday, has been termi-
nated, the Police Department reported Saturday night. He was on the force for more than
six years.

Officer Devin Bronsan, hired in September 2018, has been placed on administrative duty.
The Georgia Bureau of Investigation said Brooks had resisted arrest and grabbed a Taser
from an officer who had deployed it when officers attempted to take him into custody after
he failed a sobriety test.

“While there may be debate as to whether this was an appropriate use of deadly force, I
firmly believe that there is a clear distinction between what you can do and what you
should do,” Bottoms said at a news conference. “I do not believe that this was a justified
use of deadly force.”

A cellphone video posted on social media appears to show Brooks running from two offi-
cers before being shot. Additional video, the

GBI said, showed the man grabbing the Taser, fleeing and then turning and pointing it at
an officer.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200614/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. Atlanta rocked by fatal cop shooting

The death in a city roiled by complaints of excessive police force comes amid global street
demonstrations demanding justice for George Floyd, an unarmed Black man who was
killed in police custody last month in Minneapolis.

Police were dispatched to the Wendy’s a few miles south of downtown at 10:33 p.m. Friday
to investigate a complaint that a man had fallen asleep in a parked car blocking the drive-
through, according to a GBI statement.

When Brooks resisted being taken into custody after failing the sobriety test, the GBI said,
an altercation ensued and an officer deployed a Taser.

Shaky cellphone video shows two officers struggling with a man on the ground. The man
appears to grab a Taser, break free and run across the parking lot and out of the frame of
the camera. An officer gives chase, and another officer follows. Then the sound of three
shots can be heard.

A few seconds later, a figure can be seen in the distance running toward another figure on
the ground.

On Saturday afternoon, the GBI said that the officer’s body camera was knocked off during
the struggle, preventing the recording of the entire incident. However, the bureau obtained
surveillance video from the scene, which it released to the public Saturday night.
According to the GBI, Brooks was taken to a hospital, where he died after surgery.

One officer was treated for an injury at a hospital and discharged.

L. Chris Stewart, an attorney for Brooks’ family, said multiple witnesses had told his team
the officers put on plastic gloves and picked up their shell casings before rendering aid to
Brooks. “We counted two [minutes] and 16 seconds before they even check his pulse,” Ste-
wart said. “And people wonder why everyone’s mad.”

Stewart said lethal force should not have been used against someone with a Taser since it’s
not considered a deadly weapon by the state of Georgia.

“T’ve had cases where officers had used Tasers on victims and they argue with us in court
that Tasers aren’t deadly,” he said. “You cannot have it both ways in law enforcement. You
can’t say he ran off with a weapon that could have killed somebody, when you say it’s not
deadly.”

On Saturday night, some at the scene of the shooting roared and pumped fists in the air as
the f lames billowed higher. “No justice, no peace!” several shouted.

Over the last two weeks, the Police Department has seemed to struggle in reacting to
protests, veering from stepping back to heavy-handed shows of force.

While the department had success in recent years in working to develop a less antagoniz-
ing presence — policing marches and demonstrations remotely, via CCTV cameras, and
having officers wear regular beat uniforms rather than militaristic garb — some have ac-
cused police of being too hands-off and passive, while others have accused officers of ex-
cessive force.

In recent weeks as police chief, Shields had earned praise for listening to demonstrators
who gathered downtown to protest the police killing of Floyd in Minnesota.

“You’re pissed off, you’re afraid and nothing changes,” Shields said to protesters two
weeks ago. “I’m with you.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200614/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. Atlanta rocked by fatal cop shooting

A few hours later, the city’s downtown and upscale Buckhead district devolved into chaos
as rocks were hurled at police cruisers and windows were smashed. The next day, Shields
said police would not stand by if there was further destruction.

“Yes, you caught us offbalance once,” she said at a news conference. “It’s not going to
happen twice.”

Within hours, Atlanta police officers were captured on video shattering the windows of a
sedan and Tasing two Black college students inside.

Bottoms swiftly fired two of the officers in the incident, and last week she fired an addi-
tional two officers. Fulton County Dist. Atty. Paul Howard has charged six officers with us-
ing excessive force.

“This is why people are outraged in this city,” said Antonio Brown, an Atlanta City Council
member, who joined dozens of protesters outside the Wendy’s early Saturday after getting
a call after 1 a.m. “It’s incredibly important that our police, especially now, don’t resort to
firing a gun — not unless someone is firing a gun right at you.”

The city needed to move quickly to enact legislation forbidding the use of excessive force,
Brown said.

“There is no time for a task force at this point,” he said. “We need to act immediately to
address excessive force by police in this city.”

Whatever happened in the altercation, Brown said, he saw no reason officers would feel
that their life was in jeopardy enough to justify firing their weapon.

“He was fleeing; he did not pose danger to the people,” he said. “If the man was drunk,
there should be some de-escalating procedures in place.... Given the environment we’re in
right now, using your weapons should be the ultimate last resort.”

Shields, who is white, had long been viewed as a reformer who advocates a socalled 21st
century policing approach aimed at building public trust.

“Chief Erika Shields has been a solid member of APD for over two decades, and has a deep
and abiding love for the people of Atlanta,” Bottoms said Saturday. “And because of her
desire that Atlanta be a model of what meaningful reform should look like across this
country, Chief Shields has offered to immediately step aside as police chief so that the city
may move forward with urgency and rebuilding the trust so desperately needed through-
out our communities.”

Former Assistant Police Chief Rodney Bryant, who is Black, will serve as interim police
chief as the city launches a national search for a new leader of the force.

On Saturday morning, dozens of protesters had gathered outside the Wendy’s holding
signs that read “Black Lives Matter” and “No Justice, No Peace.”

Auri, 27, a flight attendant who lives in Atlanta’s Mechanicsville neighborhood and de-
clined to give her last name, stood on the sidewalk waving a handmade sign that said: “SE-
RIOUSLY? Another cop killing.”

“This has been happening for years,” she said. “The moment it happened in my neighbor-
hood I felt on fire. It could have been my boyfriend, my brother, my father.”

As the crowd swelled, protesters stepped out onto the four-lane road and blocked cars
from passing.

Mystified, a woman got out of her vehicle and walked toward the protesters.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200614/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. Atlanta rocked by fatal cop shooting

“I just want to get a burger,” she cried, throwing her hands in the air.

“We are taking over the streets,” a man bellowed into a bullhorn.

“Wendy’s is closed. APD needs to be closed. We need to bring back the Black Panthers. We
need to police our own communities.”

Before long, a man in a green Kia Soul drove up to the protesters and tried to inch his vehi-
cle through the crowd.

A tense standoff ensued as protesters holding placards blocked his path, knocking on the
hood of his car and posting protest fliers on his windshield and driver’s side window.
“Turn around!” they cried. “Turn around!”

After 10 minutes, the man shifted his car into reverse and turned around. Protesters
punched their fists in the air and cheered.

Standing amid the protesters, Atlanta City Councilwoman Joyce Sheperd said she shared
their anger and would take immediate action to address police use of force.

“What happened here last night was unjust,” she said. “We’ve got to reform our Police De-
partment. Period.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200614/page/1/textview 4/4
