2020. 6. 17. Reggie Bush set for USC return

Reggie Bush set for USC return

Former star’s 10-year NCAA ban is ending, and the Trojans make a path for
his return.

Los Angeles Times - 10 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Ryan Kartje

With an easing of NCAA penalties, the university prepares to welcome its long-exiled star
running back.
| os

  

 

The specter of his legend still looms over USC. His electrifying run from 2003 to 2005 re-
mains an essential thread in the fabric of Trojans football and college football writ large,
impossible to untangle from the rich histories of either. Recruits who barely witnessed his
supremacy still whisper his name, still mimic his style.

But since June 2010, on the campus where he captivated a generation, Reggie Bush has
been a ghost. It was then that the NCAA imposed harsh sanctions against USC, stripping
away its 2004 national title and forcing the school to permanently disassociate from its
star running back.

Any mention of Bush at USC was erased, every image scrubbed, all records tagged with an
asterisk after a years-long NCAA investigation revealed he and his family accepted im-
proper benefits from two would-be sports marketers.

Bush returned his 2005 Heisman Trophy as part of the fallout, the only player ever to do
so. The replica trophy that once sat triumphantly in Heritage Hall gathers dust with the
Heisman Trust. The No. 5 jersey that once adorned the peristyle end of the Coliseum is
gone too; and no Trojan has worn the number since.

But now, after 10 years in exile, shifting public sentiment over amateurism along with a
subtle change in the internal operating procedures of the NCAA’s Committee on Infrac-
tions have cleared the way for Bush’s return to USC. Wednesday marks the final day of the
disassociation ban — since reduced from a permanent one — levied against Bush exactly a
decade ago. In the eyes of the NCAA, he will be free to return to USC’s campus, and the
university plans to welcome him back.

“It’s definitely long overdue,” said LenDale White, the other half of USC’s 2004 running
back tandem. “Reggie should’ve never been in this situation, considering he was a kid

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200610/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. Reggie Bush set for USC return

when this went on. We’re 35 years old now. I definitely believe it’s time.”

Others are not so sure. There’s no doubt anti-Bush sentiment — he was, for a time, a liv-
ing embodiment of everything wrong about bigtime college athletics — has softened over
the years. But 15 years after USC’s vacated national title, some people are still awaiting an
apology.

Bush did not respond to requests for comment about a return to USC, but several of his
former teammates and others affiliated with the program during its charmed run were
supportive of his reinstatement.

“Reggie don’t owe anybody an apology,” White said. “He don’t owe nobody anything.”
Said former Trojans tight end Alex Holmes: “At no point in time have I ever felt any nega-
tivity towards him — at all. The reality ... is that Reggie didn’t do anything wrong.”

USC would not comment on Bush’s return, and its plans are unknown. While some people
still clamor for an explanation, others see Bush as a victim — even a martyr. Some team-
mates wonder if reinstatement is sufficient penance for the pain of the last decade.
“That’s for Reggie to decide, ultimately,” Holmes said. “He’s not getting the last 10 years
back. I mean, how do you make up for that?”

USC has long maintained it would like to welcome Bush, and Bush has said he’d like to re-
turn. Now, as that day arrives, can the healing finally begin?

“T would hope so,” said Pete Carroll, the title-winning former Trojans coach. “I don’t
think there’s any other choice to make.”

It was June 10, 2010, after four years of investigations, that the NCAA Committee on In-
fractions cited USC for lack of institutional control and slapped the university with suffo-
cating sanctions.

The final two wins of the Trojans’ 2004 title run, including the Orange Bowl victory over
Oklahoma that clinched a national championship, were vacated. It meant forfeiting every
win from 2005, amemorable season that ended in a legendary Rose Bow! loss to Texas.
USC was put on probation for four years, banned from postseason play for two, and docked
10 scholarships each year over the following three seasons.

“We basically got the death penalty,” former linebacker Keith Rivers said.

In all, the committee’s report listed 25 penalties to be meted out against USC’s football,
men’s basketball and women’s tennis programs. No. 15 on the list — “Disassociation of
studentathlete 1” — remained one of the last vestiges of that devastating decision.
Student-athlete 1 was approaching his fifth NFL season when his ban from USC was an-
nounced. In his first meeting with reporters following the decision, Bush called it “the
closest thing to death without dying.”

Yet, when USA Today reported that the running back had called athletic director Pat Haden
to apologize, Haden called the L.A. Times to clarify, saying that while Bush was contrite,
“never did he say ‘I’m sorry’ or ‘I apologize. Never did he say, ‘I lied to the NCAA’ or ‘I took
stuff.’ ”

As USC followed the NCAA’s edict and cut ties from Bush, many of his teammates won-
dered why the university didn’t fight harder to defend a player whose presence helped
power the Trojans to a school-record 34-game winning streak and earn the university
millions.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200610/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. Reggie Bush set for USC return

In a 2018 podcast with former NFL running back Arian Foster, Bush suggested “the people
at the university bailed on me.”

White sees it much the same way.

“If there’s anyone to blame, it’s the people who came into our moms’ and dads’ houses
and said they were going to protect us and keep us safe,” White said. “You can’t be mad at
a kid. Your jersey done sold 1,000 times in a single day, and you gotta borrow money from
your teammates to get a dollar burger from Wendy’s? Look, I don’t blame Reggie at all, so
much as I blame the so-called higher-ups, the people who are supposed to save us at that
point.”

That perception only intensified when NCAA investigations at Oregon, Ohio State and Mi-
ami elicited far less severe sanctions. And when Penn State was offered relief from sanc-
tions handed down after the Jerry Sandusky scandal, Haden met with NCAA officials but no
adjustments were made.

“To disassociate yourself from a player like that, then for the NCAA to go soft on Miami
and all these other schools, I thought [USC] was going to do something,” said Lawrence
Jackson, a defensive end from 2004 to 2007. “All this time we talk about fighting on, but
we’re not fighting in this instance?”

But while that bitterness simmered in the years that followed, an administrator was qui-
etly taking action behind the scenes to rectify the situation.

Dave Roberts, now a special assistant to USC athletic director Mike Bohn, was hired to help
build its compliance department in the wake of the 2010 penalties. Five years later, his
work earned him a place on the very NCAA committee that had so severely punished USC.
It was in that role on the NCAA’s Committee on Infractions that Roberts would play a part
in changing internal operating procedure 5-15-8.

Until the rule was changed in 2017, the committee frequently handed down disassociation
bans as part of university sanctions, according to Rod Uphoff, an attorney who served as a
nonvoting member of the committee during USC’s case. Such bans, Uphoff said in an
email, “were usually permanent.”

However, that was not the case for Michigan, where former star basketball player Chris
Webber was indicted on five criminal charges in 2002, including obstruction of justice and
lying to a federal grand jury, after he was found to have accepted nearly $300,000 in cash
and gifts from a Michigan booster. The NCAA ordered Michigan to disassociate from Web-
ber for 10 years.

Roberts was named vice chair of the Committee on Infractions on Sept. 1, 2017. A month
later, the committee adopted a new internal operating procedure, limiting disassociation
penalties past and present “to not exceed 10 years from publication of the COI’s infractions
decision.”

The change was not publicly announced, but USC sports information director Tim Tessa-
lone said that USC was informed about it at the time. Asked in April 2019 about a potential
return, Tessalone suggested that the NCAA’s ban was all that was standing in the way. “We
would love to have him back,” he said.

Last September, Bush stood in the end zone of the Coliseum and surveyed the grassy stage
where he once starred. Now, he was 34, wearing a gray suit and clutching a microphone as

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200610/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. Reggie Bush set for USC return

part of Fox’s college football coverage team.

His mere presence required permission from the NCAA. But as fans gathered in the south
end zone, chanting his name through the pregame, it was clear that his disassociation
from the university had not erased his legacy on campus.

“T don’t know what they can do to rectify everything and make up for all of this lost time,
but they definitely need to reinstate him,” former receiver Steve Smith said. “Hopefully
they give his Heisman back. Put his memorabilia back up and his jersey. Have a ceremony
apologizing and introducing him back in. Bring all the guys and make him feel special
again.”

Said Jackson: “They should re-retire his jersey,” Jackson said.

Said Holmes: “He should be in the College Football Hall of Fame, ASAP.”

But there’s no ceremony that could erase the emotional pain or undo the collateral damage
from the NCAA’s 2010 decision. There are no delusions of the NCAA returning USC’s va-
cated wins or of Bush getting his Heisman back.

Even as society grows more sympathetic to the plight of student-athletes and the NCAA
considers a future in which they can earn a profit off their name, image and likeness, there
is no rewriting that history. But USC might view Bush’s situation as a rare opportunity to
win back at least a little shine from a tarnished era.

“You can never really take Reggie away,” White said. “Reggie is a part of that history. He’s
a part of USC. Maybe once we get Reggie back, we can get back to our glory days again.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200610/page/1/textview 4/4
