2020. 6. 17. Netanyahu’s trial highlights tension

Netanyahu’s trial highlights tension

Israeli prime minister alleges ‘coup d’etat’ by left wing amid charges of
fraud, bribery and breach of trust.

Los Angeles Times - 25 May 2020 - A1 - By Noga Tarnopolsky

 

Israeli prime minister, we ee charges, appears combative on the first day.

  

wis

~ mie N

JERUSALEM — As Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s corruption trial finally be-
gan Sunday, two images from the courtroom steps stood out.

One was of the arrival of chief prosecutor Liat BenAri. The target of a raging campaign of
threats and incitement, she was encircled by beefy bodyguards she’d been assigned.

The other was that of a seething Netanyahu, surrounded by ministers applauding as he
lambasted Israel’s police, judiciary and media for “wanting to topple me at any cost.”
Netanyahu, Israel’s longest-serving prime minister and the first to be indicted, was
charged last November with fraud, bribery and breach of trust in three separate cases in
which he was alleged to have attempted to influence or control the media. On Sunday, Ne-
tanyahu, as he has often done, decried the proceedings as “an attempted coup d’etat” by
what he described as a vast left-wing conspiracy that “stitched up charges” so as to “block
the will of the people.”

Upon his arrival at the courthouse, several hundred supporters blasted supportive slogans
and campaign jingles of his Likud Party.

“Bibi, King of Israel” and “Bibi, you’1l never walk alone,” they shouted, referring to him
by his nickname.

The start of the trial culminated four years of police investigations, judicial probes, news
leaks and what critics termed an unprecedented assault against state institutions by the
man who had led the nation for almost a dozen years.

Inside the courthouse, a far more restrained Netanyahu stood up in District Judge Rivka
FriedmanFeldman’s small courtroom, No. 317, to formally identify himself and acknowl-
edge understanding the charges against him. Due to regulations in place to combat the
coronavirus, Netanyahu wore a mask, as did all others in the courtroom, and was accom-
panied by a single attorney. Three co-defendants sat nearby.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200525/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Netanyahu’s trial highlights tension

Arnon Mozes, the owner of Yediot Aharonot, the largest tabloid in Israel, is alleged to have
conspired with the prime minister to sway his newspaper’s coverage in exchange for a law
that would have quashed Israel Hayom, a free daily paper established by Las Vegas casino
mogul Sheldon Adelson meant to support Netanyahu.

Shaul Elovitch, controlling shareholder of Bezeq, the Israeli telecoms giant, and his wife,
Iris, are alleged to have received regulatory favors benefiting their company from Ne-
tanyahu, again, in exchange for positive media coverage on the Walla news portal, owned
by Bezeq.

“Never, in the history of any democracy, has anyone been indicted over positive media
coverage,” Netanyahu declared ahead of the session, quoting American lawyer Alan Der-
showitz, a close ally who represented President Trump during his impeachment trial.

But in a statement released after the court session, which lasted less than an hour, Israeli
Atty. Gen. Avichai Mandelblit said the judiciary would “continue our work even in the face
of relentless attempts to attribute conflicts of interests to law enforcement, which we re-
ject. We will continue to act on the principle that everyone is equal under the law.”

The trial takes place amid an ongoing fractious political environment, in which three in-
conclusive elections were held in a span of a year before Netanyahu and his rival, centrist
Benny Gantz, finally swore in a new government last week. Gantz agreed to serve in the
newly created post of “alternative prime minister.”

In his public remarks outside the courthouse, Netanyahu linked his signature policy prom-
ise of West Bank annexation to his ongoing legal troubles.

“They can’t defeat a strong, right-wing prime minister at the ballot box, so they are trying
to oust me through stitched-up charges,” he railed, surrounded by a cadre of ministers
from his Likud Party.

“T won’t give up a single settlement!” he promised, mocking any possible successors to his
reign as “poodles.”

The coalition agreement, reached in the midst of the COVID-19 pandemic, allows Ne-
tanyahu to present legislation annexing the West Bank, or parts of it, as of July 1 but re-
leases Gantz and the legislators from his party, Blue and White, from any obligation to
support the law.

European nations, the Arab world and many international organizations have decried any
unilateral Israeli move toward annexation as a grave breach of international law. The
European Union has threatened to sanction Israel as Netanyahu seeks to impose Israeli
sovereignty over the West Bank, which the Palestinian Authority views as the heart of a fu-
ture Palestinian state.

Among key world leaders, only Trump has supported the concept, most prominently in
parts of the economic plan for renewing Israeli-Palestinian negotiations developed by the
president’s son-in-law and senior aide, Jared Kushner.

In a radio interview, Limor Livnat, a former minister in Netanyahu’s government, dis-
tanced herself from the prime minister’s remarks and his ministers’ applause.

“The right is not on trial,” she said. “There is no conspiracy to oust him, however many
times he repeats the claim. When he says this is an attempt to oust a rightwing prime min-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200525/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Netanyahu’s trial highlights tension

ister only because he is strong and not a poodle — well, we’ve had strong prime ministers
before. Yitzhak Shamir didn’t remove any settlements.”

The raucous atmosphere on the courtroom steps was balanced by the measured, delibera-
tive domain of Judge Friedman-Feldman, who heads the three-judge panel that will decide
Netanyahu’s fate. Less than an hour after adjourning the initial session, FriedmanFeldman
turned down Netanyahu’s attorney’s request for a lengthy delay, scheduling the next ses-
sion for July 19.

Trump reelection: In the May 23 Section A, an article about President Trump’s standing in
election polls said Trump was the third person in U.S. history to lose the popular vote but
win the electoral college. He was the fourth, after Rutherford B. Hayes in 1876, Benjamin
Harrison in 1888 and George W. Bush in 2000.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200525/page/1/textview 3/3
