2020. 6. 17. Community steps up in Oakland

Community steps up in Oakland

Oakland businesses that get little from the system are aided by a caring
community.

Los Angeles Times - 11 Jun 2020 - A1 - ERIKAD. SMITH

Black-owned businesses that get little help from the system find people of all stripes are
willing to help, Erika D. Smith writes.

=.

 

Elisse Douglass knew she had to do something.

Almost two weeks ago, she took a walk over to Broadway in rapidly gentrifying downtown
Oakland and started counting the many Black-owned businesses that had been damaged
after a peaceful protest for George Floyd turned into something very different.

Windows and glass display cases were shattered. Merchandise had been ripped off. Graffiti
was everywhere.

“My real estate brain was kind of like, small businesses are struggling,” said the 32-year-
old Douglass, who is Black and spends her days working with small retailers trying to re-
open after the novel coronavirus outbreak. “These extra costs are going to be hard for peo-
ple to handle right now.”

Indeed, a recent study from the National Bureau of Economic Research found that Black-
owned businesses were hurt the most by the shutdown, with 41% of them closing perma-
nently between February and April. What’s more, 95% of Black-owned businesses are sole
proprietorships, making them ineligible for many federal relief programs.

Given this, it might be tempting for some to buy into the narrative that the protests have
only made matters worse — that taking to the streets has merely been a self-defeating ex-
ercise of (supposedly) Black people destroying the Black economy in the name of Black
lives.

President Trump has certainly insinuated as much by tweeting about “looting” and “law
and order.” None of this is true. The economic pain from the coronavirus has been deep.
But it’s the righteousness of the protests, including the few that turned violent, that seems
to have galvanized the broader American public to support Black-owned businesses in
ways so dramatic that I’m fairly certain it wouldn’t have happened otherwise.

Apparently, there’s nothing like a smashed window and graffiti to clearly convey the need
for help.

It’s help, quite frankly, that has been needed for decades. It’s just that the recent unrest
has shined a light on entrenched discriminatory practices, including access to capital, that
have kept Black busi

ness owners on unequal footing with their white counterparts and widened the wealth gap.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/202006 11/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Community steps up in Oakland

So now sales are up, as lists of Black-owned businesses have continued to circulate on so-
cial media. And far more than the usual suspects have shown up to donate to relief efforts.
Perhaps nowhere in California is this more the case than in Oakland, where the owners of
Queen Hippie Gypsy have experienced it all firsthand.

As people gathered the last Friday of May, Lilliana Ayers and her husband, Kyrah, decided
against boarding up their shop on 14th Street near Broadway, wanting it to be a “light for
the movement.” The next morning, they found the window smashed in, right over an im-
age of Tommie Smith holding a gloved fist aloft in a Black power salute during the 1968
Summer Olympics in Mexico City. Lilliana, like almost everyone I spoke to in Oakland, in-
sisted that the people who trashed her business had nothing to do with the Black Lives
Matter movement.

Queen Hippie Gypsy had been doing well before the coronavirus outbreak. And now, with
people perhaps moved by photos of the damage on Instagram, online sales of healing crys-
tals and yoga apparel have been climbing steadily, particularly among new customers.
“We've seen people from every race, religion,” Lilliana said.

After seeing the destruction along Broadway, Douglass was so overwhelmed with the de-
sire to do something that she started a GoOFundMe campaign. A relative newbie to such ac-
tivism in a city with a long and proud history of it, she had expected to raise a mere $5,000.
But in a matter of days, the campaign went viral and she had raised more than $100,000
for Black-owned businesses desperate to clean up what vandals had left.

“Tt really started as just a personal effort,” Douglass said. “I’m actually really over-
whelmed by the response.”

Meanwhile, Oakland’s African American Chamber of Commerce had already been raising
money to help Black-owned businesses recover from the shutdown to slow the spread of
the coronavirus — one that, if you’ll recall, was longer in the Bay Area than in L.A.

Now that pot of money — to be doled out in grants ranging from $5,000 to $100,000 to re-
cipients who agree to take business management training — also will be used to help fix
damage from the protests.

Cathy Adams, the chamber’s president and chief executive, said she was well on her way to
reaching a goal of $1 million, and now is working connections with corporations and
friends with celebrity friends to raise more money.

“This is what coming together looks like,” Adams said. “Where Black-owned businesses
might have seemed invisible before, people are showing up from everywhere.”

The question, of course, is, will this last? Not just in

Oakland but across California. Once the news cycle moves away from getting justice for
George Floyd and defunding police departments over the seemingly endless scourge of
brutality and systemic racism, will Black-owned businesses fall back into relative obscu-
rity?

Adams is optimistic that won’t happen.

She told me about conversations she’d had with bank executives who have pledged to re-
examine their lending practices, which too often leave out would-be business owners who
are Black who then have to cobble together start-up money from friends and family.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/202006 11/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Community steps up in Oakland

“T think we’re going to see a change,” Adams said. “White people will continue to invest in
our businesses.”

Douglass is optimistic, too.

Beyond raising money from the masses, she has managed to help create new networks of
people who want to help. She started a database so people could offer their services as vol-
unteers. One popular request has been for marketing and advertising, as business owners
try to lure old customers back and keep new ones.

Other connections have been more direct, with Black people helping Black people —
artists, for example, who have painted murals on the plywood covering the doors and win-
dows of businesses. Then there was the owner of a wig store in East Oakland who had extra
inventory that she needed to donate as she worked to clean up after being ransacked. Dou-
glass reached out to her burgeoning network and helped connect the owner with the oper-
ator of a transitional housing facility for Black women.

“It really speaks to the power of the Black community,” she said, “and why we do this
work in the first place so they can continue to be the infrastructure for our culture.”

Still Douglass harbors no illusions of the hard road ahead for Black-owned small busi-
nesses and for Black people, in general, who continue to lag behind white people when it
comes to both income and wealth.

“It’s easier to fix windows than to fix a system built on racism.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/202006 11/page/1/textview 3/3
