2020. 6. 17. As protests spread, Harris steps back into VP spotlight

As protests spread, Harris steps back into VP spotlight

Los Angeles Times - 4 Jun 2020 - A‘ - By Evan Halper, Melanie Mason and Janet Hook

WASHINGTON — The “progressive prosecutor” brand Kamala Harris tried to build during
her failed 2020 presidential bid never stuck with many party activists, who argued her
record made her more deserving of the viral meme “Kamala is a cop.”

       
 

 

Yet, with the country gripped by a wave of protest against police brutality toward people of
color — and former Vice President Joe Biden searching for a running mate — California’s
junior senator is working overtime to cement the progressive-prosecutor label into the
minds of voters.

This time, the effort appears to be working better.

Since the killing of George Floyd in Minneapolis last week, the race to join Biden on the
ticket has shifted abruptly in Harris’ favor, according to Democratic strategists and ana-
lysts.

Although the campaign dynamics could easily change again by late July, when Biden says
he’ll make his pick, Harris is making the most of the moment, showing up everywhere and
anywhere she can to position herself as a healer, a crusader and a shrewd political mind
capable of shepherding change through the criminal justice system.

“There hasn’t been a stronger voice on this issue

and out in front and more in the street with marchers than Sen. Harris,” said Cornell
Belcher, who was a pollster for Barack Obama and has been critical of his party’s lackluster
outreach to black voters in recent years.

“If there is one person who has connected in this moment in a way that rises above some
of the others, it is Kamala Harris.”

Even some activists who pummeled Harris during the primary campaign have toned down
their criticism, seeing her as the best opportunity for a woman of color to emerge as Bi-
den’s running mate.

But it remains to be seen whether Harris, a politician who has long excelled at creating in-
spirational moments only to falter in the follow-through, can move beyond the missteps
of her past and persuade voters that she can deliver.

“America is raw right now,” Harris said at a news conference with other lawmakers Tues-
day, one of her many public appearances since America’s cities erupted in protest. “Her
wounds are exposed. The reality of it is that the life of a black person in America histori-
cally, and even most recently with Mr. Floyd, has never been treated as fully human.”
Harris, who declined an interview request, said at that event that she chose a career as a
prosecutor because “I knew how law enforcement had a long history of enforcing laws in-
discriminately, and often based on race, and racism.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200604/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. As protests spread, Harris steps back into VP spotlight

She demanded Congress “take action to reform a criminal justice system that for far too
long has been informed by systemic racism and by racial bias.”

The typically opaque race for the vice presidential nomination has become an open audi-
tion in the current campaign cycle.

Biden has said he will pick a woman as his running mate and has also said he wants some-
one who has the experience to step immediately into the presidency.

Given his age and the desire to draw a sharp contrast with the often-chaotic Trump ad-
ministration, Biden wants a ticket that will convey a message of readiness to voters.

At the same time, amid the chaos and anger in the streets, he’s under increasing pressure
to choose a woman of color.

“It’s something he has to look at very, very closely,” said Harry Reid, the former Senate
majority leader. “I think that he is trying to decide what is best because what’s happening
in the country in the last week has really changed the direction of the country.”

Among the black women being considered are former Georgia state Sen. Stacey

Abrams and Florida Rep. Val Demings. Both are little known nationally, but Biden has con-
firmed they have caught his eye.

Demings is the child of a maid and a janitor who took a job as a night patrol officer and
rose through the ranks to become chief of police in Orlando.

Abrams has helped lead her party’s efforts nationally to expand voting rights. In 2018, she
narrowly lost the governor’s race in Georgia, a red state coveted by Democrats.

The nationwide demonstrations have also generated attention for Atlanta Mayor Keisha
Lance Bottoms, who has received praise for her poised and empathetic handling of the
protests in her city.

Also in strong contention is Sen. Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts, a leader of the party’s
progressive wing.

The prospects of Sen. Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota, a political moderate, have dimmed
amid renewed scrutiny of her record as county attorney prosecuting police shootings in
Minneapolis.

Biden’s most influential African American supporters are not insisting he choose a black
running mate.

“Nothing would make me more proud than to see a black woman on the ticket,” said Rep.
James E. Clyburn (D-S.C.), the highest-ranking African American in the House, whose
support was crucial to propelling Biden toward the nomination.

“But we’ve got to do what is necessary to make sure that we have someone on the ticket
who can complement the candidacy, not complicate the candidacy,” he said.

Harris’ supporters say she most closely meets that test. As a senator and former California
attorney general, she has far more national experience than the other women of color on
the short list.

Yet the Californian is still working to persuade activists that she has the drive and political
courage to push through the systemic change Democrats are promising.

As California attorney general from 2011 through 2016, she pursued tangible reform but
sidestepped more sweeping — and politically fraught — efforts to address racial in-
equities.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200604/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. As protests spread, Harris steps back into VP spotlight

She declined to back a bill requiring officers across the state to be equipped with body
cameras, for example, saying she opposed a “onesize-fits-all approach.” She also stayed
quiet on several measures introduced in the wake of Michael Brown’s death in Ferguson,
Mo., in 2014, including legislation that would have mandated independent probes into po-
lice killings.

As the politics of policing have shifted, so has Harris. During her presidential campaign,
she reversed some prior positions.

She now backs outside investigations of wrongdoing by law enforcement. She has also
called for a national standard on police use of force that would require that force be “nec-
essary” instead of the current standard in most jurisdictions that allows police to use any
“reasonable” force. She has called for banning the use of chokeholds as ways to restrain
suspects.

Her history shows Harris to be “a follower and not a leader when it comes to criminal jus-
tice reform,” said Lara Bazelon, who directs the Criminal & Juvenile Justice and Racial Jus-
tice Clinics at the University of San Francisco School of Law.

“Once there is consensus around a reform, she is all for it. Until there is a consensus, she is
just a status quo prosecutor.”

Black Lives Matter cofounder Alicia Garza is also wary.

During Harris’ presidential run, Garza said, “she was questioned about her record in
putting black people behind bars and her stance of being tough on crime. What I wanted
her to say was, that was a different time — that was a time that was before Black Lives
Matter changed the political landscape and changed what was possible in relationship to
transforming the criminal justice system. I think we got a different answer than that.”

But Garza also said that a strength Harris — and Demmings — bring is a real relationship
with the black community.

“Nobody can say that they are pandering to black people,” Garza said. “They’re black. The
thing I think is very important is somebody who can activate black voters and energize
black voters around this campaign.”

Bazelon, too, said activists are less intent on relitigating Harris’ record than they were
when she was running.

And some strategists believe Harris’ record of moderation, even if it irks activists, could
prove an asset with a broader universe of voters.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200604/page/1/textview 3/3
