2020. 6. 17. Architects hit the reset button

Architects hit the reset button

Are open offices and doorknobs still a good fit? L.A. architects envision the
potential changes ahead in public spaces.

Los Angeles Times - 31 May 2020 - A1 - BY CAROLINA A. MIRANDA

With the coronavirus changing everything, firms in L.A. envision the potential changes
ahead in public spaces.

 

 

 

 

 

In another time, not long ago, an elevator was a conveyance to reach a higher floor, an
open office was a spot to clock eight hours while hoping your boss didn’t catch you check-
ing Facebook and a doorknob was one of those banalities of architecture that seemed to
warrant attention only when it needed replacing. {| What a difference a virus makes. {1 To
live through the COVID-19 pandemic is to see the surfaces of our cities rewritten by invisi-
ble narratives of contagion. Elevators now seem like intolerably small spaces to share with
a stranger. The open-plan office, with its recirculated air and countless shared surfaces,
feels like a f lu buffet. And that humble doorknob?

It could play a starring role as a protagonist named Critical Vector in an over-the-top
summer movie about an outbreak.

The pandemic has changed everything about the way we live. It is bound to change archi-
tecture too.

“If you take the great architectural inventions of the 20th century: the airport, the high-
rise, the freeway — those are the things that are challenged the most right now,” says
Brett Steele, dean of UCLA’s School of the Arts and Architecture. “They have great density
or they promise movement at high speeds. Those are exactly the things that sit at the crux
of the crisis we are going through.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/2020053 1/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Architects hit the reset button

“It’s a reset button for the entire world,” says Mark Lee, co-founder of the Los Angeles
firm Johnston Marklee and chair of the architecture department at Harvard’s Graduate
School of Design. “Do we need so many new buildings? Do we need such specific pro-
grams? It raises questions that are really helpful.”

Already the pandemic has had architects and architecture schools (which spent their
spring semester improvising classes and project reviews over the internet) considering the
nature of buildings at a time in which one of architecture’s core purposes — creating con-
tainers that bring people together — seems almost inconceivable.

“T’m working on a synagogue, and that is a crazy problem,” says Barbara Bestor, founder
of Bestor Architecture, a 25-person firm based in Silver Lake. “(How do you do High Holi-
days after COVID with 2,000 or 3,000 people?”

The solution may involve segmenting larger spaces and segregating the most vulnerable in
a separately ventilated environment — the virus version of the glassed-in “cry rooms”
contained within some churches and movie theaters. Or it may involve designing a physi-
cal space that, Bestor says, features “a robust video component so that people can watch
remotely.”

Gatherings via videoconference could become a way of life. Architects could find them-
selves designing spaces just for that purpose.

In the early 20th century, concerns about tuberculosis and sanitation helped shape Mod-
ernism — consider Richard Neutra’s influential design for the Lovell “Health House,”
filled with windows and sleeping porches tailored to promote air circulation in California’s
dry, sunny climate. Similarly, COVID-19 is likely to reshape the ways in which today’s ar-
chitects design houses and offices, transit hubs and medical facilities. It will have archi-
tects reaching for new technologies and reintroducing old ones — say, a little less air con-
ditioning and a lot more cross ventilation.

But first, architecture firms, like all other businesses, must weather the pandemic. Design
studios have atomized, with staffs working remotely from home. And though construction
on existing projects remains underway in many locations, including California, where it
has been deemed essential, the design of new buildings has largely halted, threatening the
economic stability of many firms.

Every month, the American Institute of Architects (AIA) reports on architectural billings
for an estimated 700 U.S. firms — an index that can generally be used to project construc-
tion spending over the following nine to 12 months. From February to March, billings tum-
bled “dramatically” according to the April report. (An embedded graph looks like a literal
cliff.) The most recent index, published in May, showed a continued plunge — “the steep-
est decline on record.”

Of the 12 Los Angeles firms contacted for this story — including a small seven-person
shop, studios that employ dozens and the

L.A. outpost of a global design office with more than 1,200 employees — 11 reported having
projects suspended. For now, they are holding onto most of their employees. Only two stu-
dios reported laying off employees and two reported furloughs.

The majority of architects interviewed, however, expressed anxiety about what is to come.
“We might not,” said one architect, “have any new starts in the fall.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200531/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Architects hit the reset button

Kermit Baker, who serves as the AIA’s chief economist and helps produce the organiza-
tion’s various economic reports, says he has seen a couple of major downturns in his 25
years at the AIA but never anything like the pandemic. “The first was the 9/11dot-com
bubble, and the other was the recession of 2008 and 2009,” he says. “There is little mean-
ingful comparison.”

The economics are dire. And yet there is a determination to not waste the moment.

“Every crisis is an opportunity,” says Hernan Diaz Alonso, director of the Southern Cali-
fornia Institute of Architecture (SCI-Arc). “The optimist in me believes that this will force
us to reevaluate everything that we do.”

This is a time, he says, to ask “the big metaphysical questions” about architecture and its
purpose. It’s also about considering the nuts and bolts. “If we don’t get a vaccine, what
does that mean? What does that mean in terms of physical space? What do you do with a
doorknob?”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/2020053 1/page/1/textview 3/3
