2020. 6. 17. State widens nursing home testing

State widens nursing home testing

All residents and staff must be checked under a mandate that overrules a
less strict policy in L.A. County.

Los Angeles Times - 28 May 2020 - A1 - By Jack Dolan

California’s health department has issued new instructions to all skilled nursing facilities
to test everybody in their facilities in hopes of slowing the spread of the coronavirus, a
move that overrules a less strict testing policy allowed by Los Angeles County.

 

7 MANDALORY
une. SCREENING

 

  

 

Nursing homes have become ground zero for the COVID-19 pandemic because elderly peo-
ple with underlying health conditions living in close quarters provide an almost perfect
breeding ground for the lethal new virus. A Times data analysis earlier this month found
that about half of all coronavirus deaths in California occurred in skilled nursing or as-
sisted living facilities.

California’s new testing guidelines for skilled nursing facilities come as health officials in
states across the country, including New York, New Jersey, Florida and Texas, have con-
cluded that the best way to get a handle on the unfolding tragedy is to test both residents
and staff in nursing homes and isolate anyone who is positive, especially asymptomatic
employees who sometimes work at multiple homes and can easily spread the virus from
facility to facility.

But the devil has been in the details: finding enough

test kits, determining how frequently to test and deciding who will pay for it all.

State health officials sent a letter to all skilled nursing facilities in California instructing
them to test all residents and staff at least once. If a home shows no cases, it must continue
to test 25% of residents and healthcare workers on a weekly basis and ensure that all staff
members are tested once per month.

That goes much further than guidance from L.A. County, which, as the Times reported last
week, had instructed homes with no cases that they could skip testing staff and test only
10% of residents weekly.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200528/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. State widens nursing home testing

“Nursing home residents, and the healthcare personnel who care for them, are among our
most vulnerable for COVID-19 infections,” said California’s health and human services
secretary, Dr. Mark Ghaly, after the state issued the new instructions. “Mandatory testing
will provide the knowledge we all need to make informed care decisions.” The testing di-
rective comes as officials are demanding health agencies do more to reduce the crisis in
nursing homes.

On Tuesday, the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors voted unanimously to appoint an
independent inspector general to look into the county’s oversight of nursing homes, in-
cluding the county health department’s slow testing.

‘“‘What’s been most frustrating for me is that time and time again, when we listen to the
death count that this horrible virus has caused, all roads lead back to our skilled nursing
facilities,” said Supervisor Kathryn Barger before the vote.

Tens of thousands of residents

‘Mandatory testing will provide the knowledge we all need to make informed care deci-
sions.’ — Dr. Mark Ghaly, California’s health and human services secretary

in elder care homes have died of the disease in the United States. Nearly a thousand have
died in LA County alone, accounting for about half of the COVID-19 deaths in the county.
As nursing homes in the United States first began to grapple with the coronavirus in early
February, most were testing only residents who showed symptoms. If they found someone
was positive, the homes quarantined them from other residents and also banned visits
from friends and family.

As outbreaks multiplied, it became clear that at least some were being sparked by staff —
who could pick up the virus at home, on the bus, or at one of the other nursing homes
where they worked. So facilities started testing symptomatic employees as well.

Then, in late April, as the COVID-19 death toll approached 300 in L.A. County nursing
homes — a relatively modest toll compared to where it stands now — Los Angeles County
health director Barbara Ferrer announced a new plan to test everyone inside nursing
homes in an effort to turn the grim tide.

The move was necessary because it had become clear the virus was spread by people who
had no symptoms, Ferrer said at the time.

So last week, advocates for the elderly were shocked when The Times reported that L.A.
County health officials were still far behind in their pledge to test everyone in nursing
homes, having completed the process in only about a third of the facilities in the county.
They were also surprised to learn county officials had sent a letter advising homes with no
confirmed cases to test only a small sample of residents — not staff — on a weekly basis.
Ferrer defended the policy change as a “wise move” that allowed the county to focus ef-
forts on facilities with the worst outbreaks, but critics were unimpressed. “There are un-
doubtedly more people who have died because of that inaction,” said Dr. Michael Wasser-
man, president of the California Assn. of Long Term Care Medicine, which represents doc-
tors, nurses and others working in longterm care facilities.

“It’s disgraceful that the county would take a step backward on testing at a time when
dozens of nursing home residents are dying from the coronavirus almost every day,” said
Michael Connors, a spokesman for California Advocates for Nursing Home Reform.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200528/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. State widens nursing home testing

At her daily briefing on Wednesday, Ferrer said the county would comply with the new
guidance from the state.

She also noted that of the 30 healthcare workers who have died of COVID-19 in L.A. County,
22 were employees at skilled nursing facilities — by far the highest toll among healthcare
professionals.

Ferrer came under fire this week from local political leaders for her department’s handling
of the coronavirus outbreak.

Supervisor Mark RidleyThomas said the high death rate in nursing homes is “directly a re-
sult” of inattention and a lack of appropriate oversight of nursing homes that predates the
pandemic.

“The suffering, the misery, the low quality of care” in nursing homes all should have been
addressed before the crisis began, he said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200528/page/1/textview 3/3
