2020. 6. 17. Latinos stand up to looting

Latinos stand up to looting

Gatherings largely peaceful as ACLU joins chorous for lifting lockdowns.

Los Angeles Times - 4 Jun 2020 - A‘: By Colleen Shalby, Matthew Ormseth, Luke Money and Matt Hamilton

 

More large protests against the killing of George Floyd and local police violence spread
across Southern California on Wednesday, along with growing pressure to end curfews im-
posed over the weekend.

Police reported few problems by Wednesday evening, after dealing with scattered looting
and vandalism Saturday, Sunday and Monday.

Officials pushed back curfews later into the day, amid pressure to lift them all together.
Los Angeles County Supervisor Janice Hahn said that while the curfews may have been
warranted on Sunday and Monday nights, “now it seems like they are being used to arrest
peaceful protesters. I don’t think they are needed anymore.” Mayor Eric Garcetti said the
curfew could be lifted if things remained quiet Wednesday night.

On Tuesday, an attorney for the American Civil Liberties Union sent a letter to Board of Su-
pervisors Chairwoman Kathryn Barger requesting that she rescind or restrict the curfew
order.

ACLU senior counsel

Ahilan Arulanantham wrote in the letter that the U.S. Constitution does not permit the
county to order such a sweeping restriction on free speech and travel to address “a few lo-
calized attacks on property.”

“We recognize that in the last few days some individuals have damaged and stolen prop-
erty in areas where many others have engaged in peaceful protests, but that unlawful con-
duct cannot justify a state of emergency in the entire county that effectively places over 10
million people under house arrest for twelve hours every evening and morning,” Aru-
lanantham wrote.

The biggest demonstration took place at the Civic Center, where thousands protesting Dist.
Atty. Jackie Lacey for her handling of police killings barely broke stride as the ground be-
gan to sway from the ripples of a 5.5 earthquake centered near Ridgecrest around 6:30 p.m.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200604/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Latinos stand up to looting

“The D.A. should be held accountable for her lack of leadership and care for the people that
we lost,” said protester Al Calderon, 26. “It’s unsettling to hear these families’ stories.”
On Wednesday, 61 people were charged with looting and other crimes in connection to the
break-ins, fires and thefts across L.A. County. About 2,500 people were arrested between
Friday and Tuesday morning during the largely peaceful protests.

“T support the peaceful organized protests that already have brought needed attention to
racial inequality throughout our society, including in the criminal justice system,” Lacey
said in a statement. “I also have a constitutional and ethical duty to protect the public and
prosecute people who loot and vandalize our community.”

A series of peaceful protests over the police killing of Floyd rolled through Newport Beach
on Wednesday.

Though the protests were calm, a television camera captured a scary scene on Balboa
Boulevard when a vehicle zipped through a crowd of demonstrators — eventually colliding
with a bicyclist.

No one was injured, and the driver stopped and was cooperating with the investigation,
Newport Beach Police Department spokeswoman Heather Rangel said. It didn’t appear to
have been deliberate, she said.

For Gale Oliver Jr., a pastor at the Greater Light Family Church in Santa Ana, a protest
against racism and police brutality in one of Orange County’s wealthiest enclaves was a
sign of the times.

“It’s a blessing that this is going on in Newport Beach,” said Oliver, who is black. “I mean,
this is going on in Newport Beach? I guess America is finally listening.”

Oliver said pastors in Santa Ana began meeting with Orange County law enforcement offi-
cials about five years ago in hopes of ending “policing from the point of view that they’re
under attack.” He’s seen progress, but more needs to be done, he said, here and through-
out the country.

“Two men have said, ‘I can’t breathe.’ One said it eight times, one said it 11 times,” Oliver
said, referring to the deaths of Floyd and Eric Garner, who died in 2014 while being re-
strained in a chokehold by a New York City policeman. “‘I can’t breathe’ — what that re-
ally means is there’s things that will suffocate you. Racism will suffocate you. Hate will
suffocate you.”

Kyle Scallon, 21, turned out Wednesday to protest not just Floyd’s death but also a discrim-
inatory approach he believes law enforcement in Orange County has taken for too long.
Driving in his hometown of Mission Viejo and elsewhere in the county, Scallon said, he has
been pulled over by officers intent on questioning his girlfriend, who is Creole.

“They ask me for my license,” he said, “and they ask her where she lives, where she’s go-
ing, what she’s doing in the car.” In his experience, Scallon said, the default view for police
is to assume people of color are doing something wrong, no matter the circumstances of
the encounter.

“1’m here because I just want cops to realize not everyone’s bad,” he said, standing with a
group of protesters on the corner of MacArthur Boulevard and Pacific Coast Highway. “It’s
become the system, but they need to realize not everyone they meet is bad.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200604/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Latinos stand up to looting

Thousands of people have been arrested in the L.A. region since Saturday. At 8th Street and
Crenshaw Boulevard on Tuesday night, police detained dozens of protesters who had con-
verged at the mayor’s residence. The crowd chanted “peaceful protest” intermittently and,
for the most part, calmly complied with police as they were cuffed with plastic bands.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200604/page/1/textview 3/3
