2020. 6. 17. Milley regrets church stroll with Trump

Milley regrets church stroll with Trump

Mark Milley concedes that his presence in Lafayette Square was too politi-
cal.

Los Angeles Times - 12 Jun 2020 - A1- Associated press

Joint Chiefs chairman says he was wrong to join the president for an event he says was po-
litical.

   

WASHINGTON — Army Gen. Mark Milley, the nation’s top military officer, said Thursday
he was wrong to have accompanied President Trump on a walk to a church through
Lafayette Square, where he was photographed in his combat uniform with the presidential
entourage.

The statement by the Joint Chiefs chairman risked the wrath of a president sensitive to
anything hinting of criticism of events he has staged. Trump’s June 1 walk through the
park to pose with a Bible at a church came after authorities used pepper spray and flash
bangs to clear the park and streets of largely peaceful protesters.
Milley said his presence and the photographs compromised his commitment to a military
divorced from politics.

“T should not have been there,” Milley said in remarks to a National Defense University
commencement ceremony.

Milley’s public expression of regret comes as Pentagon leaders’ relations with the White
House are still tense after a disagreement last week over Trump’s threat to use federal
troops to quell civil unrest triggered by the death of George Floyd.

After protesters were cleared from the Lafayette Square area, Trump led an entourage that
included Milley and Defense Secretary Mark Esper to St. John’s Episcopal Church, where he
held up a Bible for photographers and then returned to the White House.

“My presence in that moment and in that environment created a perception of the military
involved in domestic politics,” Milley said. “As a commissioned uniformed officer, it was a
mistake that I have learned from, and I sincerely hope we all can learn from it.”

Esper has not said publicly that he erred by being with Trump at that moment. He tolda
news conference last week that when they left the White House he thought they were going
to inspect damage in the square and at the church and to mingle with National Guard
troops in the area.

Milley’s comments at the National Defense University were his first public statements
about the Lafayette Square event, which the White House has hailed as a “leadership mo-
https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200612/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Milley regrets church stroll with Trump

ment” for

Trump akin to Winston Churchill inspecting damage from German bombs in London dur-
ing World War II.

The public uproar following Floyd’s death at the hands of Minneapolis police has created
layers of extraordinary tension between Trump and senior Pentagon officials.

When Esper told reporters on June 3 that he had opposed Trump bringing active-duty
troops on the streets of the nation’s capital to confront protesters, Trump castigated him
in a face-to-face meeting.

Just this week, Esper and Milley let it be known through their spokesmen that they were
open to a “bipartisan discussion” of whether the 10 Army bases named for Confederate
Army officers should be renamed as a gesture aiming to disassociate the military from the
racist legacy of the Civil War. On Wednesday, Trump tweeted that he would never allow the
names to be changed, catching some in the Pentagon by surprise.

The Marine Corps last week moved ahead with a ban on public displays of the Confederate
Army battle flag on its bases, and the Navy this week said it is planning a similar ban for its
bases, ships and planes. Trump has not commented publicly on those moves, which do not
require White House or congressional approval.

Milley used his commencement address, which was prerecorded and presented as a video
message in line with social distancing due to the coronavirus pandemic, to raise the matter
of his presence with Trump in Lafayette Square.

He introduced the subject to his audience of military officers and civilian officials in the
context of advice from an Army officer and combat veteran who has spent 40 years in uni-
form. He said all senior military leaders must be aware that their words and actions will be
closely watched.

“And I am not immune,” he said, noting the photograph of him at Lafayette Square. “That
sparked a national debate about the role of the military in civil society.”

He expressed regret at having been there and said the lesson to be taken from that moment
is that all in uniform are not just soldiers but also citizens.

“We must hold dear the principle of an apolitical military that is so deeply rooted in the
very essence of our republic,” he said. “It takes time and work and effort, but it may be the
most important thing each and every of us does every single day.”

Milley also expressed his outrage at the Floyd killing and urged military officers to recog-
nize centuries of injustice toward African Americans.

“What we are seeing is the long shadow of our original sin in Jamestown 401 years ago,”
he said, referring to the year in which the first enslaved Africans arrived on the shores of
colonial Virginia.

Milley said the military has made important progress on race issues but has much yet to
do, including creating the conditions for a larger proportion of Black officers to rise to the
military’s senior ranks.

He noted that his service, the Army, has just one Black four-star general and mentioned
that the Air Force is about to swear in the firstever African American service chief.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200612/page/1/textview 2/2
