2020. 6. 17. Marching as a multicultural front

Marching as a multicultural front

Protests attract diverse allies, some first-timers, to racial justice cause

Los Angeles Times « 7 Jun 2020: A1 - By Leila Miller

Throughout his life, Alan Michnoff ’s engagement with racial justice issues had been “next
to none.” While the 30-year-old North Hollywood resident had always been aware of po-
lice b

 

  

Last weekend, as the George Floyd protests swelled nationwide, something changed.
Michnoff came across a passionate Instagram post by a friend. “I am emotionally and
physically exhausted yet I continue this fight,” she wrote, demanding that others not be
complacent in the face of racism.

“That just struck a chord with me,” Michnoff said. “A lot of people have been saying that.
Just hearing it over and over again, and it being perhaps the right time, it finally hit for
me.”

He donated to local bail bond funds and signed petitions demanding charges against the
officers involved in Floyd’s death and that of Breonna

Taylor, a 26-year-old emergency medical technician who was shot by Louisville, Ky., po-
lice in her apartment. On social media, Michnoff found link after link to resources for peo-
ple seeking to support the movement.

“I felt I had no choice but to participate in something so important,” he said, holding up a
cardboard sign that read “Silence is violence” at a protest in front of the North Hollywood
police station Thursday.

The protests

in the wake of the killing of Floyd — a 46-year-old black man who died after a Minneapo-
lis police officer kneeled on his neck while he was begging for air — have mobilized people
from all races and walks of life who had not been actively involved in racial justice issues.
Many have been educating themselves online, signing petitions and attending protests
where they often listen to speakers talk about the racism they face on a daily basis.

In this way, Floyd’s killing has created a wide, multicultural activist movement unprece-
dented in scope when compared to other notorious cases of police abuse. The 1991 video-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200607/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. Marching as a multicultural front

taped beating of black motorist Rodney King by Los Angeles Police Department officers
provoked an international outcry, but it did not spark anything close to this movement.
Instead of spurring city leaders to action after years of police abuse, the King case exposed
political gridlock, and ineffectiveness at City Hall that culminated with the 1992 riots.

The political and social ramifications for the Floyd protests are already becoming clear.
Many cities are considering restrictions on the use of police force, and Los Angeles Mayor
Eric Garcetti has proposed cuts to the LAPD. It’s far from the sweeping defund LAPD plan
demanded by Black Lives Matter but still represents a political sea change.

Activists have also taken the protests into affluent, suburban neighborhoods across the
city and found residents joining the marches and expressing their outrage.

“So many white and nonblack folks are staying on message — that if we can lift black lives
from the margins of society, we can lift all lives,” said Jody David Armour, a USC law pro-
fessor.

The broad reach of the protests has marked a significant shift in recognition of the Black
Lives Matter movement, which began as a response to the acquittal of George Zimmerman,
a neighborhood watch volunteer, in the 2012 killing in Florida of Trayvon Martin, an un-
armed black teenager. The campaign grew from a hashtag into a powerful social organiz-
ing tool that sought to amplify acts of racism against blacks nationwide.

Its members have been a presence for years at the Los Angeles Police Commission, force-
fully decrying shootings and at times disrupting meetings that have ended with the arrest
of LAPD critics. But its agenda of reforms saw only limited interest at City Hall — until this
last week.

It’s unclear how deep those reforms will reach and how long the current movement will
sustain itself.

Melina Abdullah, cofounder of Black Lives Matter in Los Angeles, said that although the
movement in the past has had the support of non-black coalitions, the current protests
have brought in new allies.

“That’s encouraging that people want to stand up despite, maybe, their own privilege,”
said Abdullah, a professor at Cal State L.A. “We also want to make sure that this is not a
moment of them getting in but that they are ongoing partners in this work.”

Brenda Stevenson, a professor of history and African American studies at UCLA, said ac-
tivists recognize that the support of diverse coalitions is critical to success, pointing to the
civil rights movement as an example.

“People have been welcoming of all kinds of people, regardless of race, regardless of age,”
she said. “They have welcomed the military who are taking a knee. They have welcomed
police in uniform who are taking a knee. People really want this to work, and they know
this will work if there is a broad coalition of people with the same basic goals.”

She said the protests have attracted so many allies — including first-time activists — in
part because of the coordination among coalition groups and the fact that statements re-
leased by workplaces affirming the movement have made people feel more comfortable
getting involved.

The high-profile deaths of several black people at the hands of the police in a spate of
weeks has convinced many of a systemic problem, Stevenson said, adding that the shared

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200607/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. Marching as a multicultural front

vulnerability to the novel coronavirus may have also worn down barriers between people.
Many new to protesting have reached out to black community leaders. The Rev. Najuma
Smith-Pollard, pastor at Word of Encouragement Community Church in Central L.A., has
received text messages and emails from acquaintances she does not speak to often who
have asked how they can express solidarity.

“T’m encouraged by it,” she said. “In this country, we need allyship. This is an allhands-
on-deck season. I’m encouraged because it’s a sign people are awakening.”

Members of Showing Up for Racial Injustice, a national network focused on organizing
white people to fight racism, helped sponsor the protest attended by Michnoff and several
dozen other mostly white protesters in North Hollywood on Thursday. Stevie Nelson, a 34-
year-old white artist from Los Feliz, came out because “sitting at home doesn’t feel like
enough.”

Nelson had spent the week searching for ways to support the black community. She do-
nated to social justice organizations and emailed a city councilman about an alternative
spending plan for City Hall dubbed “the People’s Budget.”

She’s come across posts on social media about blackowned coffee shops to support and
recommendations for books and podcasts, finding Instagram to be a helpful tool in “how
to be of service without it being your black friend’s responsibility.”

Before the protests, her involvement with racial justice causes had been limited to dona-
tions.

“I paid attention, but it didn’t necessarily lead to me acting,” said Nelson, who held a
“Black Lives Matter” sign. “I’m ashamed of it but I’m grateful to show up even though I’m
late.”

Standing nearby, Leah Pablo, a 30-year-old Asian American North Hollywood resident,
said she had previously mostly engaged with issues of race by sharing information on so-
cial media.

She decided to attend the protest despite concerns about the pandemic after spending
most of Tuesday listening to the Los Angeles Police Commission’s weekly meeting. During
the public comment session, speakers had condemned the use of projectiles and tear gas
against protesters.

“T heard over and over how the city hadn’t done enough to protect people,” she said.

Local religious groups have also been spurred into action. The Rev. Zach Hoover, executive
director of L.A. Voice, a multifaith organization, has received countless questions from
clergy about how to become involved. Rabbis text him daily about where they should show
up.

About 1,200 people attended a protest in Pasadena last weekend sponsored by churches
within L.A. Voice’s network and other congregations. Hoover said there’s been both an in-
ternal recognition of the importance of the moment and also “people challenging each
other in loving ways” to step forward.

“Nobody was like, we have to go have a conversation with our board,” he said. “It was like,
‘sign us on, sign us on.’ ”

Spiritual leaders have also sought to bridge gaps on a more intimate level. Rabbi Elazar
Muskin of Young Israel of Century City, an Orthodox synagogue, and Bishop Kenneth

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200607/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. Marching as a multicultural front

Ulmer of Faithful Central Bible Church in Inglewood livestreamed a video chat Wednesday
that was attended by more than 150 people.

The two recognized during the meeting that both the Jewish and black communities have a
history of being persecuted.

Ulmer explained to Muskin that his community fears that the protests “might be a repeti-
tion of the pattern of the past” with an eventual return to “businesses as usual” without
meaningful change. But he acknowledged that the diversity of the protesters now seems
unprecedented.

“We feel now that more people not like us get it,” he said. “What hurts is that it took this
long for people to get it.”

Brandon Earl, a 35-yearold resident of downtown L.A., shared that perspective. He said
that, as a black man, he faces racism constantly and that whenever he walks outside he has
to be conscious of how he dresses and speaks “in order to have some type of acceptance.”
A group of predominantly white neighbors from his apartment building attended a protest
last week after he shared a photo of himself standing in front of National Guard trucks
holding up a sign that read, “Vote or Die.”

“When I see allies and people who don’t look like me still marching and protesting and vo-
calizing their feelings about what was happening, that makes me feel a lot better as to
where we stand right now,” Earl said.

That message has been conveyed to protesters directly. Addressing several hundred people
in front of a downtown L.A. courthouse Thursday, Allen Wesley, a 59year-old black man,
shared how his mother had been beaten by police when he was 11 years old.

“T see a lot of Black Lives Matter signs here and not that many blacks,” he told the crowd,
most of whom were in their 20s and 30s. “That gives me hope .... We can’t do it by our-
selves.”

Listening nearby was Nathalie Illescas, an 18-yearold resident of East L.A. who held a sign
with the words, “Don’t shoot.” It was her first protest, and as a member of the Latino
community whose family has received racist comments in public because of their skin
color, she said, she related to the oppression suffered by black people .

While her parents were initially reluctant to let her attend because of the

COVID-19 pandemic, she sat her mother down yesterday.

“This is serious,” Illescas told her. “It’s me speaking out and raising my voice.”

Also there for his first protest was Eduardo Realegeno, an 18-year-old Salvadoran Ameri-
can student from South L.A. While he sees injustices in his own community, Realegeno
said, he doesn’t need to find parallels for Floyd’s death to resonate.

“He’s a human being, that’s howI relate,” he said. “It’s not about being a minority. It’s
about standing with everyone here.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200607/page/1/textview 4/4
