2020. 6. 17. Comic lampoons Trump's words to get her laughs

Comic lampoons Trump’s words to get her laughs
Sarah Cooper’s Trump riffs have been a social media smash

Los Angeles Times - 2 Jun 2020 - A1 - BY GREG BRAXTON

Sarah Cooper lipsyncs the president’s pandemic-related pronouncements.

 

 

 

 

President Trump and comedian Sarah Cooper really don’t care for each other. But these
days, they are in perfect sync.

Cooper has become one of the hottest comics of the coronavirus era with her social media
videos, in which she lip-syncs some of Trump’s most controversial pandemicrelated pro-
nouncements. With a mix of deadpan flair and exaggerated facial expressions, she has
spun his headline-grabbing statements into comedy gold.

In “How to Medical,” she lampooned Trump’s comments at a press briefing at which he
suggested to Dr. Deborah Birx, response coordinator for the White House coronavirus task
force, that the virus could be attacked by hitting the body with a “tremendous” or ultravi-
olet light. He also suggested that “injecting” disinfectant into the body or lungs could
“knock it out in a minute.”

Attired in a blue jacket and black blouse, Cooper illustrated his comments with a lamp in
her home and by pointing to her face and rear end in showing how light could enter the
body. She held up a bottle of cleaner when showing how disinfectant could battle the virus.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200602/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. Comic lampoons Trump's words to get her laughs

Wearing the same outfit minus the jacket and changing her appearance slightly, she por-
trayed the incredulous Birx too.

The video caught fire and has at

tracted more than 18 million views on Twitter. “It’s not something that people have seen
before — a black woman lip-syncing Trump’s words in a very realistic, sort of documen-
tary kind of way,” said Cooper.

In a video posted Saturday, Cooper, with a fan blowing her hair to mimic Trump’s own
rustling in the wind, channeled the president’s declaration that “MAGA loves the black
people.”

She previously showed how Trump conjured up the name of his conspiracy theory about
former President Barack Obama with her eyes darting from a copy of former White House
photographer Pete Souza’s book “Obama: An Intimate Portrait” to a small gate nearby.
“Obamagate,” she/he declared, her eyes brightening.

Cooper’s vicious roasting of Trump has scored shoutouts from top entertainers including
Ben Stiller, Jerry Seinfeld and Bette Midler. She’s appeared on Ellen DeGeneres’ talk show
and on MSNBC’s “The Last Word With Lawrence O’Donnell.” She’s met with several pro-
duction companies about possible projects.

“I’m having a moment, but it’s definitely been surreal,” Cooper said from her New York
home. “Agents who wouldn’t call me back three years ago now want to talk to me. Things
are going really well while the world is falling apart. It’s been quite a roller coaster. One
moment, it’s ‘Oh, my God, what’s happening with the pandemic, lockdown and quaran-
tine?’ and the next moment it’s ‘Oh, my God, Ben Stiller retweeted my tweet.’ ”

She added, “I’m feeling so many emotions at once. People are having a good laugh when
it’s really hard to laugh.

As a comedian and artist, you always wonder, ‘Am I making a difference? Am I doing
something worthwhile?’ ”

Cooper gives much of the credit for her newfound success to “the writing, which is so
good,” She explained, “Trump is an amazing comedy writer without realizing it. There
were so many moments I was able to use. I put the video out within a few hours of him say-
ing those words. A lot of people said they saw the parody before they saw the real thing,
which made it not only good content but newsworthy.” Trump’s stumbles remind her of
her former career as a designer for Google, where she was required to attend a stream of
monotonous meetings where much was said but little was accomplished.

“When Trump started doing those daily briefings and being confronted with how incom-
petent he is and how out of his element he is, I was just reminded of being in the corporate
world and seeing people BS-ing through a meeting, making their coworkers think they
know things when they really have no idea what they’ re talking about,” Cooper said.

Her distaste for Trump has fueled her comic sensibility: “It seems like we’ve been
gaslighted for 31/2 years. Now he’s saying ridiculous things that make no sense, but people
are nodding and no one is calling him out. That frustration is part of the reason why I
wanted to do something like this.”

The feeling is mutual. When it comes to Cooper, Trump is no fan.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200602/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. Comic lampoons Trump's words to get her laughs

When Trump in October 2017 launched one of his countless Twitter attacks against the
mainstream media, saying, “The Fake News Is going all out in order to demean and deni-
grate! Such hatred!,” Cooper tweeted,

“Fake news: Donald Trump has become unfit for office. Real news: Donald Trump was AL-
WAYS unfit for office.”

That response resulted in Trump blocking her from his millions of followers. One descrip-
tor in her Twitter bio is "#blockedbytrump.”

“Sarah has always been super-political,” said Katie Morrissey, a friend of Cooper’s who is
also a comedian. The two had been performing at stand-up venues before the shutdown in
New York.

“Seeing what’s happening with her is just wild,” Morrissey

said. “Having Trump’s words come out of a woman of color shows how ridiculous he is and
how old white men get away with saying things. The American people have been numb for
so long to what he says that something like this wakes you up a little to the absurdity of it
all.”

Cooper started dabbling in comedy about 11 years ago. “I had wanted to be an actress when
I was little, but I wasn’t very good at it, so I tried a lot of different things. One night I went
to an open mike and just told a story. I found that I liked that a lot better than playing a
character.”

She developed routines about life as a single woman (she is now married) and her Jamaican
immigrant parents. “When you’re Jamaican, you don’t consider yourself African American
even though everyone else considers you that,” she said. In one joke she and her father
were walking around a mall. Her father pointed out, “Sarah, look at those black people
over there,” to which she responded, “Dad, that’s a mirror.”

While at Google, she started writing blog posts about how to appear smart at meetings.
When those posts began to get attention, she got a deal to write a book titled “100 Tricks to
Appear Smart in Meetings: How to Get By Without Even Trying.”

The success of that book persuaded her to devote more of her energy to comedy: “I hada
platform. There was a period when I was teaching the business world about humor and
bridging the two worlds.”

Her stand-up career was just starting to gather momentum when the pandemic struck. But
breaking through during a quarantine when comedy venues are shut down has been
bizarre.

“T had just done my first Montreal ‘Just for Laughs’ audition,” she said. “I was starting to
get noticed, hosting open mikes. Now I’m not able to go out and perform at night. It’s been
a little bit of a blessing because I can focus on my comedy now working at home.”

Since Cooper is getting used to feeling comfortable in front of audiences, she’s been able to
better process her sudden success.

“TI feel things happen the way they’re supposed to happen,” she said. “This might be a lit-
tle better for me. I do have anxiety, so maybe this was a better way of putting myself out
there [more] slowly than if I had gotten bombarded and put on stage in front of 5,000 peo-
ple where I might have been completely overwhelmed. I see this as kind of a blessing.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200602/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. Comic lampoons Trump's words to get her laughs

And it hasn’t all been about looking for laughs. The “How to Medical” video was developed
during an emotional week.

“T had started the week crying about this 5-year-old girl, Skylar Herbert, who had died of
COVID-19,” she said. “Her parents were first responders. I was very depressed, very sad.
On Thursday, I made that video. By Friday, it was blowing up. I posted comments for peo-
ple to donate to Skylar’s memorial fund. I was able to use an opportunity to help. I was
proud of that.” So far Cooper says she has received little backlash on her Trump attacks.
She’s even heard from Trump supporters who are amused by the videos.

Asked how she thinks Trump would respond to her “Trump mode,” she paused.

“That’s a real good question,” Cooper said. “I’m of two minds on this. One, he wouldn’t
realize I was making fun of him. He would probably think, ‘There’s a black woman who
supports me. Get her to the White House.’ Or he gets really angry that his voice is coming
out of my mouth, and he sues me.”

In the meantime, she’s working on a new book — an Audible original that will be “my
take” on Dale Carnegie’s “How to Win Friends and Influence People,” she says. She’s also
working on developing a late-night stand-up set.

And of course, there will be more videos: “I'll keep on doing them as long as my head
writer gives me material.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200602/page/1/textview 4/4
