2020. 6. 17. Will insurance cover damages caused by looting? It depends.

Will insurance cover damages caused by looting? It depends.

For small businesses, the scope of insurance payouts depends on multiple
factors.

Los Angeles Times - 1 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Sam Dean, Laurence Darmiento and Ronald D. White Times cooking editor
Genevieve Ko contributed to this report.

Sean Wotherspoon spent Saturday night in his Los Angeles home, watching live as his
businesses were destroyed.

 

 

 

He watched as securitycamera feeds showed people shattering the plate glass windows of
his Round Two store on North Fairfax and walking out with more than $250,000 worth of
high-end street wear. He saw them make off with about as much inventory from his vin-
tage store next door. He watched as the Round Two location on the other side of the coun-
try in Richmond, Va., was hollowed out by fire.

“T’ve been robbed before, but nothing like this,” Wotherspoon said.

Protests over the killing by Minneapolis police of George Floyd continued in cities across
the country Sunday night, and thousands of Angelenos took to the streets.

Looting has accompanied some of the protests. Among the first businesses to be burglar-
ized was a Minneapolis Target near the police precinct of officer Derek Chauvin, who has
been charged with third-degree murder and manslaughter after killing Floyd by kneeling
on his neck as he struggled for breath.

In the days since, national chains and local businesses have been burglarized, including
some in downtown Los Angeles, the Fairfax district, Beverly Hills and Santa Monica’s
beachfront commercial zone.

Many businesses were already struggling with slashed revenue and dismal earning
prospects under the COVID-19 pandemic.

But how and whether they bounce back from shattered windows, stolen merchandise and
burned-out buildings hinges on one factor: their insurance policies.

As Wotherspoon spent his Sunday assessing the losses to his stores, he admitted that he
wasn’t exactly sure whether his policy would protect him from these kinds of damages.
“We are insured, but I don’t know what we are covered for, and I don’t know whether we
are covered for losses” in a civil disturbance, he said. “We may not know for a week or so.”
Business insurance is similar to consumer car insurance: Basic liability is required by many
landlords (though not all) in a lease agreement, protecting proprietors in the event that
they face lawsuits from customers who are injured in their stores, among other legal

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200601/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Will insurance cover damages caused by looting? It depends.

claims. But it’s often up to the individual business owners to decide how much insurance
they want to buy to cover their inventory and equipment in case of theft, fire and other
scenarios.

Large chains like Target, Starbucks and Apple buy sophisticated policies that cover the en-
tire chain for losses stretching into the millions of dollars, according to Janet Ruiz, director
of strategic communication at the Insurance Information Institute.

But for smaller businesses, the amount of coverage can vary widely in terms of deductibles
and dollar limits, depending on the type of business, the value of the inventory and the
depth of an owner’s pockets. Since not all landlords require businesses to insure their in-
ventory and equipment against loss, some local owners will end up having to cover all of
the losses and repair costs on their own.

For those who are insured, a general cost estimate is about $1,200 a year for a small busi-
ness with up to 100 employees and $5 million revenue, Ruiz said, adding that “it depends
on how much they are willing to spend if they have a loss.”

Restaurants, whose kitchens pose fire risks, may have to pay for insurance covering their
equipment at a higher rate than retail stores where customers peruse racks of clothes.
Fraser Ross, owner of the Kitson boutiques on Robertson Boulevard, recorded video from
across the street as people moved on from burglarizing the MedMen store nearby,
smashed the windows of his outlet store and started hauling out clothes, accessories and
what cash was in the register. He estimates that $300,000 worth of merchandise was
stolen but believes all will be covered by his insurance, though he needs to check with his
lawyer.

“In 2002 we were robbed at gunpoint for $35,000 in watches,” Ross said. “Everything was
covered.”

After the coronavirus lockdown forced Ross to close his doors in late March, he said, the
only expenses he kept paying were for his Shopify online store, basic utilities and his in-
surance policy. He fears some of his neighbors might have canceled their insurance poli-
cies during the lockdown.

A few miles east of Kitson, crowds broke the glass door and windows at Chi Spacca, the
Italian restaurant that had been operating as the Mozza to Go takeout operation during the
coronavirus lockdown.

Once inside, they took all the restaurant’s wine, electronics, an empty cash register and
some chef ’s knives; threw plates; and lit a pool of lighter fluid on fire on the floor. Next
door at Osteria Mozza, looters took a third of the liquor from the bar and some high-end
champagne, according to Kate Greenberg, director of operations for the restaurant group.
Mozza’s staff spent Sunday photographing the property and plans to take a 3D image to
show the insurance adjusters the extent of the fire damage.

“Whether it was a salad thrown out or anything, we’re taking a photo of it all,” Greeenberg
said.

Now, to try and prevent further damage, business owners across the city are boarding up
display windows and removing as much valuable inventory as they can. Ross said he
boarded up his Kitson stores Sunday and went to a pop-up location in Beverly Hills and
loaded up his car.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200601/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Will insurance cover damages caused by looting? It depends.

Big companies also prepared for more damage Sunday. Target closed or adjusted the hours
of 175 locations across the country in response to the protests, including 49 stores in Cali-
fornia. Whole Foods locations in and around Los Angeles, Minneapolis and Chicago re-
mained closed Sunday, and Walmart and Apple announced that many of their stores would
shutter across the country.

Until this weekend, the two most costly civil disturbances in the nation’s history occurred
in Watts in 1965 and Los Angeles in 1992, following the acquittal of four police officers in
the beating of African American motorist Rodney King. The 1992 unrest was the most
costly in

U.S. history, causing an estimated $1.4 billion in property damage in today’s dollars, ac-
cording to the data analytics provider Verisk Analytics and the Insurance Information In-
stitute.

The cost of this week’s unrest has yet to be tallied — but in many cases, insurers will likely
be stuck with the bill.

California Insurance Commissioner Ricardo Lara called on insurers to move quickly to help
affected businesses recover from the riots.

“Commissioner Lara is expecting adjusters to be on the ground as soon as possible to help
any looted businesses quickly access their insurance benefits,” said Michael Soller,
spokesman for the state insurance department.

Lara also will be making a determination on whether to issue an emergency declaration
that would allow insurers to use out-of-state adjusters to speed the process, he said. This
was done in 2018 following the Camp and Woolsey fires, when the scale of the damage
overwhelmed insurers.

Because of the COVID-19 crisis, Lara ordered insurance companies to refund a portion of
commercial premiums for businesses affected by the pandemic through May and re-
quested that they extend grace periods for paying premiums through mid-July.
Businesses affected by looting should contact their insurance companies about the grace
periods and premium rebates. Because of the commissioner’s actions, they should have
more time to pay premiums and can qualify for lower rates. Businesses can contact the
Department of Insurance for assistance in submitting claims or with questions about their
coverage.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200601/page/1/textview 3/3
