2020. 6. 17. She’s prepped all her life for chance at police reform

She’s prepped all her life for chance at police reform

Los Angeles Times - 11 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Jennifer Haberkorn and Sarah D. Wire

WASHINGTON — Nearly 30 years ago, Karen Bass and other activists in South Los Angeles
expected the beating of Rodney King — because it was videotaped — to spark a movement
to reform policing.

   

In the wake of the latest act of police brutality caught on video, Bass — now a powerful
Democrat in Washington — is hoping to use the national outcry to finally enact the federal
policing reforms that failed to materialize af1991.

House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D-San Francisco) put Bass, chairwoman of the Congressional
Black Caucus, in charge of the House’s response to the death of George Floyd at the hands
of a Minneapolis police officer. On Monday, Bass introduced a bill that she’Il have to shep-
herd through the House and potentially through negotiations with congressional Republi-
cans and the White House if it is to be signed into law.

It’s a formidable task, given the gridlock that has frozen legislation in the Democratic-led
House, Republican-led Senate and unpredictable White House. And her message risks be-
ing co-opted by progressive Democrats, who have called to “defund” the police, and
Republicans who are hoping to paint the Democratic effort as extreme.

Protests sparked by Floyd’s killing have given rise to a swelling, nationwide movement
that cuts across virtually all aspects of American society. It’s a moment Bass is determined
to capture.

“People see that this ister

sue is not an issue that only affects, and should only be responded to, by Black people,”
Bass, a fifth-term Democrat, said in an interview. “I am very encouraged that that really
pushes the country to an inflection moment where maybe we can actually accomplish
something significant.”

Republicans have not embraced Bass’ bill, but many have said they want to enact policing
reforms. House and Senate Republicans plan to introduce their own bills as soon as this
week.

The Democrats’ bill would make it easier for people to sue a police department if their civil
rights are violated and for police to be prosecuted for criminal behavior. It would set up a
national network to track police misconduct to prevent fired officers from getting rehired

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/202006 11/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. She’s prepped all her life for chance at police reform

in a different jurisdiction, make lynching a federal hate crime and ban chokeholds and
neckholds among federal officers.

Bass, 66, traces her interest in policing reforms to when she was a 19-year-old civil rights
activist in South Los Angeles. She and other activists were harassed by Los Angeles police
officers, she says, recounting vandalism to her car and multiple break-ins at her house.
Bass said they infiltrated her protests to try to stir up violence and the chokehold was
common.

“The police chief at the time said the reason Black people died from the chokehold was
that we didn’t have the same veins in our neck as ‘normal people,’ ” she said. “So I didn’t
have a choice. If you were going to be an activist in Los Angeles in 1973, you had to be in-
volved in police abuse because the police were always abusing us.”

By 1990, she had become a physician’s assistant. Shaken by the crack epidemic, she co-
founded the Community Coalition for Substance Abuse Prevention and Treatment, a mul-
tiracial group that aimed for treatment and intervention rather than arrests and prison
sentences.

Part of that new take on the war on drugs was a push back on the heavy policing measures
that then-Chief Daryl Gates used in South Los Angeles to control the crack epidemic. Bass
helped pass a City Charter measure in 1992 to change LAPD’s structure and create civilian
review of officer misconduct.

Bass served on committees that investigated allegations of local police abuses. “Every ma-
jor push has had her stamp on it, including the effort to reform the Los Angeles Police De-
partment in the early ’90s,” said L.A. County Supervisor Mark Ridley-Thomas. “She’s well
initiated and deeply experienced.”

When Rodney King was beaten by LAPD officers and it was caught on video, Bass saw an
opportunity to prove to the world what was happening on her streets.

“Of course, we felt terrible that he had been beat up. But we were happy that finally, fi-
nally, the world would see what happened,” she said. “We thought it [would be] over — all
the things that we had worked for 20 years before. We never had evidence. Now we had ev-
idence.”

What she didn’t realize at the time was that the video would become just the first viral
video of police misconduct. Many more would follow as cellphone cameras became com-
mon. A commission was established to study LAPD reforms. But most of the recommenda-
tions were not enacted until years later, if at all.

She felt personally responsible in 1992 for the civil unrest that broke out in her community
after the police officers were found not guilty of beating King.

“I was just devastated. I felt that I had not done my job,” she recounted in a 2011 book,
“Million Dollar Conversations.” The activists “failed because if we had succeeded, people
would not have been rioting. They would have come together to bring about change.”

This time, Bass says, people from all walks of life are demanding change. But even now,
there are reasons to be skeptical that Congress can enact meaningful police reforms. Presi-
dent Trump on Tuesday tweeted — without evidence or providing specifics — that a
75year-old man who was shoved to the ground by two police officers in Buffalo, N.Y., may
have been an “ANTIFA provocateur” and the incident could have been a “set up.” The offi-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/202006 11/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. She’s prepped all her life for chance at police reform

cers have been charged with felony assault, and the man remains hospitalized. It was not a
positive sign for bipartisan negotiation.

But Trump’s chief of staff, former Rep. Mark Meadows, met with Sen. Tim Scott (R-S.C.)
on Tuesday about possible legislation.

“Hopefully we can be responsive with real legislation, or action,” Meadows said.

There is wide support for a federal ban on the chokehold and making lynching a federal
crime. But allowing people to sue police departments and officers faces more skepticism
among Republicans.

Bass will also face resistance from progressive groups, as well as fellow Democrats such as
Rep. Ilhan Omar (D-Minn.), because of her refusal to embrace calls to “defund the police.”
Bass and the majority of congressional Democrats don’t support the idea of defunding or
eliminating police departments, and the slogan “defund the police” has come to mean dif-
ferent things to different people. Some see it as a call to redirect portions of police budgets
to other community resources in an effort to decrease crime. Bass’ bill does not eliminate
any funding for police departments, but she supports the idea of spending more money on
programs that prevent crime.

Proponents of the bill will also have to find a way to maintain public pressure on lawmak-
ers to act in a world in which cable TV news may quickly move on to another issue.

The Congressional Black Caucus plans to continue to do virtual town hall meetings, Bass
said.

When and if negotiations on a reform bill take place, Bass is expected to play a central role.
It’s a somewhat familiar place for Bass. As leader of the state Assembly during the Great
Recession, she was recognized nationally for working with Republican leaders and GOP
Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger to turn the state’s economy around.

“She’s got the long view of where we’ve been, where we’ve missed opportunities ... where
we pushed too hard, where we didn’t push hard enough,” said L.A. City Councilman Mar-
queece Harris-Dawson, who took over Community Coalition when Bass was elected to the
state Assembly.

Bass’ prominent role comes as Washington Democrats have quietly begun speculating
about who might become speaker when Pelosi — who considered retiring in 2016 — steps
down. Bass is frequently named in that mix.

“She has the temperament. She has the knowledge of the caucus. She has the understand-
ing of the rules. And I really can’t point to a member who says they either don’t like her or
can’t stand her,” said Rep. Bennie Thompson (D-Miss.).

On the policing bill, Bass could be uniquely positioned to craft a compromise, given the
position of respect she holds among House Democrats and her relationships with congres-
sional Republicans.

“What was important to me was her role as chair of the caucus and her vision and knowl-
edge of what we needed to do — [that it] was understood both within the Congress and
outside the Congress, and I think that has been accomplished,” Pelosi said in a brief inter-
view.

Bass also enjoys a surprising friendship with House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy (R-
Bakersfield), a rarity in the increasingly partisan Washington. It was forged after the two

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/202006 11/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. She’s prepped all her life for chance at police reform

bonded when they sat near each other in the Assembly. McCarthy says he predicted that
she would become Assembly speaker before she landed the job, making her the first
African American woman to lead a state legislature.

McCarthy has not commented publicly about Bass’ bill, but he said in an interview Monday
that he was optimistic about finding common ground with Democrats and praised Bass’
ability to negotiate between Republicans and progressive Democrats.

“She can have a very smart approach. I know that she would want to make law, make
change and not just make a statement,” he said.

Bass, who has a liberal voting record, laughed when questioned about her bipartisan
friendship with McCarthy and other Republicans, who are often seen publicly sparring at
congressional hearings.

“Sometimes there is a little bit of theater attached to that,” she acknowledged. “You don’t
necessarily see us afterward when we’re talking and joking.”

But those relationships may prove vital. Getting such high-stakes legislation through a di-
vided Congress will require getting many disparate outside voices on board; the old-guard
civil rights leaders, the Black Lives Matter demonstrators who have led the movement in
the streets, the police departments that have squared off with them, mayors and police
unions. Harris-Dawson said Bass’ relationships across that spectrum built from decades of
work may bring some unexpected forces to the table.

“She has a real gift for having tough conversations,” Harris-Dawson said. “There is a way
in which [her] sort of genuineness, the seriousness of purpose, the no-bull— just touches
people, so they respond very positively.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/202006 11/page/1/textview 4/4
