2020. 6. 17. Magician erases social distancing

Magician erases social distancing
‘The Present’ conjures up live ‘wows’ to 25 households at a time

Los Angeles Times - 26 May 2020 - A1 - By Jessica Gelt

“The Present” is performed virtually via Zoom to 25 households at a time.

  

Put on your best little black dress and get ready for an evening out — on your sofa. It’s date
night 2020 and love (and, ahem, coronavirus) is in the air. You won’t be going to the the-
ater this evening, or any evening soon, but thanks to the Geffen Playhouse and magician
Helder Guimaraes, the theater is coming to you.

The show is called “The Present,” and it’s presented live via Zoom to 25 households at a
time. The nine shows per week have sold out through Aug. 16, making “The Present” a lo-
cal phenom — all the while proving that virtual performances featuring socially distanced
audiences can, in fact, feel communal.

Many have speculated what theater of the future will look like, and while that remains un-
clear, Guimaraes and the Geffen’s viewfrom-home programming, dubbed the Geffen Stay-
house, has shed light on what the theater of now can look like.

It turns out the present, as illuminated by “The Present,” isn’t so bad after all. The key to
the show, Guimaraes said — how it accomplishes that transcendent feeling of together-
ness provided by the best live experiences — is interactivity.

“If this social distance vanishes for a short time, I will have done my job,” Guimaraes says
at the beginning of the show, which is directed by the Academy Award-nominated pro-
ducer and director Frank Marshall, whose storied career includes films in the “Indiana
Jones,” “Bourne” and “Jurassic Park” franchises.

Erasing the social distance between the digital boxes of Zoom is, in fact, the grand illusion
of a show filled with jaw-dropping illusions.

Guimardes explained the trick during a phone interview shortly after opening night: In the
world of teleconferencing programs, the screen becomes the fourth wall. In “The Present”
he manages to break that fourth wall by speaking to his audience about this moment in

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200526/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Magician erases social distancing

history we are experiencing together and by asking the audience to participate in the magic
he is performing.

A crucial component of “The Present” is a small box mailed to audience members before
the show. They are instructed to not open it until the performance has started. The con-
tents of the box are then used by the audience members, with careful instruction by
Guimaraes, to create the magic tricks inside their own homes.

Their reactions — frequently sheer joy and wonder — are partly what makes “The
Present” so remarkable. Guimardes is watching

the audience through his screen, just as they are watching him and one another. It’s a meta
mindbender that yields delightfully communal results.

‘“‘When the show begins, I’m very aware of the medium I am using,” Guimaraes said. “But
as the show keeps going, little by little, everyone forgets that they are alone or that they
are seeing that screen.”

Enabling the audience to forget the medium requires quite a bit of behind-thescenes der-
ring-do so a complicated experience appears seamless, Marshall said.

“We were all doing it in email and on Zoom and trying to arrange the camera and audio
and set and wardrobe and then rehearse the show,” Marshall said. “It was a little bit of
what I guess the early days of live TV were like. It’s on the fly; it’s in the moment.”

The show, which features a theatrical retelling of Guimaraes’ experience in quarantine as a
child after a debilitating accident, is packed with subtle technical accomplishments made
in less than a month: staff (in gloves and masks) dropping off equipment at Guimaraes’
apartment, securing permission from Zoom to broadcast in HD, ensuring Guimaraes had
the fastest internet connection possible, making certain that lighting and sound were top-
notch, set-decorating the corner of Guimaraes’ apartment used for the show, carefully
tracking technical cues and more.

Guimaraes’ fiancee, Catarina Marques, who is sheltering in place with Guimaraes, serves
as the show’s camera operator. Marshall was meticulous about how the camera is used to
make the magic as impactful as possible.

A single camera zooms and tilts on Guimaraes’ hands and cards but does not cut away, so
the audience can see there is no manipulation — no edits, no special effects, no faking of
the tricks.

“Necessity is the mother of invention,” Marshall said. “We looked for ways we could use
the platform to enhance the storytelling and the show.”

Then there are the logistics of getting those boxes of props in the mail to audience mem-
bers.

“We’re running a wartime-level production workshop at the Geffen, rolling out boxes in-
stead of tanks,” said the Geffen’s artistic director, Matt Shakman. “Everyone is in separate
rooms and working separate shifts, putting together everything box by box, and getting
them out in a timely manner.”

Shakman is grateful that in “The Present” his team at the Geffen has found a way to keep
creating theater at a time when traditional performing arts in America have shuddered toa
halt. He too feels interactivity is key to the show’s success, but he is careful to say the ap-
proach won’t work for all forms of theater.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200526/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Magician erases social distancing

“This particular show was a real miracle, lightning in a bottle, but I don’t think I could re-
produce it right away,” he said.

And even though “The Present” is selling out tickets at $125 per household (increased
from $85), the much-needed funds won’t stanch the financial bleeding wrought by the
theater’s closure, Shakman said. The audience limit of 25 households — to preserve the
show’s intimate, interactive feeling — makes profitability impossible. Even with sellout
audiences, the number of people who will see “The Present” through mid-August will be
about the same as for a normal six-week run at the 661-seat main stage, he said.

Still, Shakman is grateful for every bit of support — and magic — “The Present” can
bring, he said.

As for Guimaraes, he never stops being thrilled and touched by a moment at the end of the
show (which we will not spoil) when the audience takes part in a trick together and shows
the results to one another and to Guimaraes.

“Those moments when something unexpected happens, and this happens in their own
hands, are, for me, so important,” he said. “It’s a privilege to see people having those re-
actions and sharing their feelings with me and others.”

For the audience, the privilege is also those moments, however fleeting, when they get to
feel the joy of being together, even while they are apart.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200526/page/1/textview 3/3
