2020. 6. 17. Bars and gyms may soon reopen

Bars and gyms may soon reopen

Day camps and some sports may be back by next week. Details from state
are unclear.

Los Angeles Times - 6 Jun 2020 - A‘ - By Hailey Branson-Potts and Phil Willon

California officials also say day camps and some pro sports could return as early as next
week.

 

 

 

California officials said Friday that counties could begin reopening gyms, day camps, bars
and some professional sports by as early as June 12, but specifics remain unclear.

The state said it would release more detailed guidelines later. Officials stressed that such
reopenings would be based on local conditions. Rural counties where COVID-19 has been
less of a problem will probably be able to reopen much quicker.

“By far and away the most important thing is for county and local officials to use the
state’s guidance and consider it in light of their own data, and their own trends,” said Dr.
Mark Ghaly, secretary of California Health and Human Services.

The state thinks that “if counties do this under the strong guidance of their public health
officers — and with the consideration for the local conditions — that they can do this ina
lower risk and safer manner,” he said.

Any reopening will come with strict safety rules and social distancing mandates.

The announcement marks the latest effort to rapidly reopen the economy after months of
closures because of the pandemic. California continues to see new cases and deaths, and
there has been debate about whether the state is reopening too quickly.

“Just because some businesses are opening doesn’t mean your risk for COVID-19 is gone.
We all need to continue to keep physical distancing, wash our hands and wear face cover-
ings in public,” said Dr. Sonia Angell, the state’s public health officer and director of the
California Department of Public Health.

“As we continue to release guidance on how different sections can reopen with modifica-
tions, it is important to remember guidance doesn’t mean ‘go,’ ” Angell said. “Your local
health officer will make the final decision about which sectors will open guided by data
specific to your community.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200606/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. Bars and gyms may soon reopen

With coronavirus restrictions being eased, combined with a week of protests across the
state against police brutality and racial inequality, state health officials expect to see the
number of COVID-19 cases in California to increase.

“Certainly, we’re prepared,” Ghaly said. “We're going to see an increase in cases and with
that the risk of people becoming sick and dying.”

Ghaly said that’s why it’s so critical for county public health officials to assess the scope of
the COVID-19 pandemic in their areas, and their ability to respond adequately, before im-
plementing any of the new guidelines released by the state. If counties do that, they should
be prepared to care for an uptick in coronavirus cases, he said.

Some counties continue to struggle with the virus.

As the number of confirmed coronavirus cases in Orange County topped 7,000 this week,
officials said they were worried about the spread of the virus at the large protests against
racism and police violence.

“Is ita concern? Absolutely. Do we respect their right to protest? Certainly,” Orange
County Executive Officer Frank Kim said at a news briefing Thursday. “We would hope that
they would do so and use as much caution and safety protocols as reasonably possible.”
Orange County on Friday reported 296 new COVID-19 cases, bringing the total to 7,064.
The county also reported nine additional deaths, bringing the total to 174.

Health officials said an estimated 3,021 residents have recovered from COVID-19. There
were 283 people hospitalized as of Friday, including 123 in intensive care.

Orange County was quicker than other urban areas, including Los Angeles County, to begin
reopening public life.

Huge crowds that descended on Orange County beaches at the end of April prompted Gov.
Gavin Newsom to temporarily close them — a move that irked local leaders, who re-
sponded by suing Newsom. County beaches have since reopened.

In recent days, there have been massive protests across Orange County, as in the rest of the
country, over the death of George Floyd, a black man who died May 25 after a white Min-
neapolis police officer pressed his knee into Floyd’s neck for almost nine minutes.

‘‘We’re always concerned when we see large gatherings, and I think it’s a real balance be-
tween preserving the rights of individuals to express their ist Amendment rights as well as
a desire and a request from the county that individuals do their best to maintain their six
feet of social distancing,” Kim said.

Some of the Orange County cities now seeing protests against Floyd’s death are the same
ones that saw raucous street demonstrations last month calling for the state to lift coron-
avirus restrictions.

The overwhelmingly white makeup of the smaller crowds at the reopening protests last
month was not lost on people of color who have been marching the last several days. Some
called it an overt display of privilege at a time when a disproportionate number of people
who have been infected by and died of COVID-19 in California are black, Latino and poor.
More anti-racism protests are planned in Orange County and elsewhere throughout the
weekend.

Meanwhile, Orange County has been told by the state it will have to wait to reopen com-
munity swimming pools, said Lilly Simmering, assistant director of the county health

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200606/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. Bars and gyms may soon reopen

agency.

A county order requiring face coverings in public, which officials said prompted a death
threat against County Health Officer Dr. Nichole Quick last week, remains in place.
Simmering said that “should our numbers start to look better,” officials would discuss an
end date or loosening of the current health order.

Simmering said officials “understand the frustration,” but added that masks are one of the
few ways to slow the spread of the disease, for which there is no cure or vaccine. “Your
concerns are the same as our concerns,” she said.

She also clarified details of the face covering and distancing rules. “My husband likes to go
on long bike rides. He doesn’t have to wear a mask,” Simmering explained.

“You put on a face mask when you cannot maintain the six feet of social distancing. If you
can maintain the six feet of social distancing, you have a choice.”

In Los Angeles County, where many COVID-19 testing sites had been shut down at some
point amid the protests, all sites were reopened as of Friday, officials said. The closures
and resulting drop in the number of people being tested could hurt the region’s response
to the outbreak, health experts warned.

“We are committed to ensuring that testing is widely available to people who need them,”
Dr. Christina Ghaly, director of the L.A. County Department of Health Services, said ina
statement.

She said it was “inspiring on many levels” to see the anti-racism protests. She said the
county did not issue a mandate to close COVID-19 testing facilities amid the demonstra-
tions but allowed each site to make its own decision on whether to close or adjust hours.
Officials saw the volume of testing “decline slightly” over the last week because of both
closures and “a higher-than-usual noshow rate at sites across the county,” she said.

Los Angeles County on Friday reported 1,445 new cases of COVID-19, bringing the total to
61,045 by early evening. The county also announced 36 new deaths, bringing the total to
2,565.

Of those 36 deaths, 25 were older than 65, nine were between the ages of 41 and 65, and
one was between the ages of 18 and 40, officials said. Twenty-nine had underlying health
conditions.

Officials said that 94% of people who have died in L.A. County to date had underlying
health conditions.

County health officials said they anticipate an increase in cases in the coming weeks be-
cause of the reopening of many businesses and other aspects of public life, as well as the
protests. L.A. County Public Health Director Barbara Ferrer said a risk of exposure exists in
any large gathering, “whether on the boardwalk in Venice or joining a protest against
racism.”

Ferrer said that if a person is in a large crowd, in close contact for at least 15 minutes with
people not wearing face coverings, he or she should consider selfquarantining for two
weeks to see if symptoms develop.

She said that people should remember that the virus “has a long incubation period” and
that “if you do get tested right away after exposure, you’re likely to test negative” because
the viral load could still be low.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200606/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. Bars and gyms may soon reopen

“Testing negative does not mean you cannot become infected later in the incubation pe-
riod,” and it is still advised to stay away from others for 14 days, she said.

The Public Policy Institute of California on Wednesday released a new poll showing most
Californians were wary of reopening too quickly amid the continuing pandemic.

The poll found widespread support for current statewide restrictions implemented to curb
the spread of the virus. Some even want tougher safeguards, and many remain fearful
about contracting COVID-19.

Of those polled, 36% said the virus was the most important issue facing the state today,
compared with 23% who said they believed jobs and the economy were the top concerns.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200606/page/1/textview 4/4
