2020. 6. 17. L.A., Bay Area on split paths

L.A., Bay Area on split paths

L.A. moves faster than the Bay Area despite higher infection rate and more
daily deaths.

Los Angeles Times - 7 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Maura Dolan and Rong-Gong Lin Il

The state’ Ss biggest metropolitan areas reopen at different paces.
Se en: i rin Ser

 

 

During the 1918 flu pandemic, Los Angeles w was s much more aggressive than San Francisco
in combating the virus, and much slower to restart its economy.

During the current viral catastrophe, the roles are reversed.

Late last month, Los Angeles announced it had received state permission to reopen hair
salons, barbershops and inside dining at restaurants, even though its per capita infection
rate and daily deaths were much higher than the Bay Area’s. At least one infectious-dis-
ease expert was perplexed.

“The last thing you want to do when numbers are increasing is loosen up shelterin-place,”
said Dr. John Swartzberg of UC Berkeley. “That is the bottom line. We know that sheltering
in place works.”

In the current pandemic, the Bay Area, where Silicon Valley was an early hot spot
statewide, shut down three days before Los Angeles, helping to quickly stem the coron-
avirus’ spread there. Its slower reopening has come under fire from some Bay Area busi-
nesses and residents, but its caution reveals much about the political differences between
California’s two largest metropolitan areas.

In the Bay Area, public health officers have long worked closely and enjoy the support of
elected leaders, making it easier to decide health strategy as a region. The Bay Area com-
prises multiple counties, each with its own health officer, giving them a collective
strength.

Los Angeles faces different pressures. Its neighbors have fewer coronavirus cases and
moved to reopen more quickly. L.A. County has a single health officer, who must alone
shoulder the desires and lobbying of 88 different cities, each with different agendas.
When one county moves more quickly to reopen, neighboring counties are under pressure
to follow.

“How do you tell somebody in Long Beach, who is suffering, that everybody living on this
block can go across the street in Orange County and get their hair cut, but you as a barber

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200607/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. L.A., Bay Area on split paths

can’t go back to work, when there are safe ways to do that?” Los Angeles Mayor Eric
Garcetti asked.

San Francisco Mayor London Breed alluded to that pressure at a recent news conference,
suggesting that Napa County’s reopening of restaurants had sparked questions about why
San Francisco was moving more slowly. Every county is in a different situation, she said.
San Francisco is the densest city in California, and the virus thrives in densely populated
places.

Some have suggested that the Bay Area can more easily shelter in place because of its large
tech industry, which involves tens of thousands of employees who can more easily work
from home, as opposed to manufacturing and service workers.

But that theory isn’t necessarily borne out, said Chris Thornberg, an economist who heads
Beacon Economics, a research and consulting firm. He said he did not believe the regions’
different economies affected varied stay-at-home orders.

Furthermore, he said, because early estimates of as many as 1 million deaths nationwide
proved too high, the lockdown orders in retrospect were probably unnecessary.

“The data shows it was an overreaction,” he said. “We didn’t know this two months ago,
and acted with an abundance of caution, and I give them credit for that. But to me, the data
screams this is unnecessary.”

Older people, who are most likely to die of COVID-19, might want to stay home, but
younger people should return to work with masks and social distancing, he said.

Many health experts say the Bay Area’s more aggressive action and a stronger and earlier
stay-at-home order have played a role in limiting the spread of the highly contagious dis-
ease. Early and effective use of a shelterin-place order is going to seem like an overreaction
if it’s implemented successfully, leaving hospitals with ample capacity to care for the sick.
Dr. Tomas Aragon, health officer of the city and county of San Francisco, said the Bay Area
was able to shut down early and sustain closures because health authorities enjoyed the
backing of elected officials and the public.

“We really felt we had the support of the elected officials and also the population,” Aragon
said during an online forum with Breed, who confessed she was frustrated with the city’s
slow pace of reopening.

In Santa Clara County, health officer Dr. Sara Cody recently criticized the state for reopen-
ing too quickly. At the same time, she has come under fire from some business and tech
leaders for being overly cautious.

“Your public health department is operating as though nothing has been learned and
nothing has changed,” said a recent fullpage ad in the Mercury News, signed by former
tech executive Paulette Altmaier. “Meanwhile, the economic damage from [sheltering in
place] is fearsome and mounting.”

When Contra Costa County failed to reopen as quickly as some of it neighbors, residents
took to the online forum Nextdoor to criticize its health officer, Dr. Chris Farnitano.

“T know there’s a lot of frustration out there,” Farnitano said in a news release Wednes-
day, “but it’s important to keep in mind that interventions like social distancing have
saved lives.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200607/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. L.A., Bay Area on split paths

In Los Angeles, the drive to reopen the city and county largely came from the Board of Su-
pervisors, but Supervisor Kathryn Barger said it was not influenced by political pressure.
She noted that all of L.A. County’s neighboring counties moved ahead with an accelerated
reopening schedule in the week before L.A. County went forward.

“Everything we’ve done has been based on the data brought forward by public health. And
that’s been brought forward based on the criteria set by the state. And this board has been
very careful to make sure that we do it in a deliberate and careful fashion based on public
health,” Barger said in an interview.

Barger said the fact that the county met the state’s reopening threshold and acted a week
after surrounding counties reopened shows the decision “was based on public health, not
on anything else.” But the state permits counties to have stricter rules for reopening.

The most significant measure of how quickly to reopen is the number of coronavirus cases
per 100,000 people, UC Berkeley’s Swartzberg said.

L.A. County has the second-highest rate in the state, after Imperial County.

Barbara Ferrer, L.A. County director of public health, said at a recent supervisors meeting
that it was “time for people to be able to get back to work.”

Still, she said, it was her job to worry about a possible surge in cases.

‘“‘We’ve always known that as more and more people are going to be out and about, we run
this risk of there being a surge,” Ferrer said. “It’d be one thing to see a slight increase,
which we would anticipate from having more people out and about. What we have to avoid
is that huge increase that causes a threat to our healthcare system.”

L.A. County received state approval in part by meeting two benchmarks: stable or decreas-
ing hospitalization rates of COVID-19 patients and a rate of no more than 8% of residents
testing positive for the virus. From May 18 to May 24, L.A. County reported that of people
who underwent tests, 6.7% tested positive. During that same time period, the number of
patients in hospitals with confirmed diagnosis of the coronavirus declined by 1%.

In defending San Francisco’s go-slow approach, Aragon noted that Lassen and Sonoma
counties saw a surge of cases after taking steps to reopen. Lassen had to pull back, he said.
During the 1918 flu pandemic, Aragon said, the places that reopened slowly did better eco-
nomically because they did not have large second waves of infection.

Bay Area health officers believe the reopening must be done in phases, starting with re-
suming the lowestrisk activities.

It takes two to four weeks to observe the effect of each reopening on new infections and
hospitalizations, Aragon said.

Contra Costa and Santa Clara counties both recently announced looser restrictions, includ-
ing permitting indoor retail shopping, although much remains closed because of concerns
over protests and sporadic theft and property damage triggered by the killing of George
Floyd in the custody of Minneapolis police.

“These are not easy decisions to make,” said Garcetti in Los Angeles. “And I’ve always
said: We would not do things one day earlier than we needed to, or one day later than we
needed to. But it is very clear. We have larger than Great Depression unemployment in Los
Angeles.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200607/page/1/textview 3/3
