2020. 6. 17. Trump vows to sanction China, pull out of WHO

Trump vows to sanction China, pull out of WHO

Citing crackdown on Hong Kong, he says U.S. will end benefits.

Los Angeles Times - 30 May 2020 - A1 - By Eli Stokols and Tracy Wilkinson

WASHINGTON — Strongly admonishing the Chinese government, President Trump an-
nounced Friday that the United States was “terminating” its relationship with the World
Health Organization and threatened to revoke some of Hong Kong’s longtime financial
benefits to sanction China for its crackdown on the semiautonomous territory.

 

    

— i SE AN ee i ;
Reading from teleprompters in the Rose Garden, Trump blasted China broadly for a “pat-
tern of misconduct.” He reiterated his long-standing accusations that it has fleeced the
United States economically, ignored global maritime treaties and caused the coronavirus
pandemic — complaints that have become central to his reelection campaign.

“The world is now suffering as a result of the malfeasance of the Chinese government,”
Trump declared.

Though the White House had called his appearance a news conference, the president left
after delivering the prepared statement without taking questions, which probably would
have focused on the national outrage and urban unrest over the killing of African American
George Floyd by a white policeman in Minneapolis this week.

Trump sought to build anticipation for his threat to punish Beijing’s increasingly heavy-
handed approach to Hong Kong by teasing it earlier in the day with a tweet simply saying
“CHINA!” However, his rhetoric against Beijing was stronger than the steps he took or
threatened, experts on U.S.-China relations said.

The president suggested that the United States would alter or terminate preferences for
Hong Kong on trade, visas, taxes and tariffs — all of which have been contingent on Bei-
jing respecting Hong Kong’s autonomy in the years since it reclaimed the island territory
from Britain in 1997. Those preferences are of great value to the government, businesses
and investors on mainland China, which otherwise would not benefit from them.

“Hong Kong is no longer sufficiently autonomous to warrant the special treatment we
have afforded the territory since the handoff,” Trump said. His administration would “be-
gin the process of eliminating policy exceptions,” he said, without offering any details.

He also threatened to sanction officials deemed to be “smothering” the rights of people in
Hong Kong. “China claims it is protecting national security, but the truth is Hong Kong
was secure and prosperous as a free society,” Trump said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200530/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Trump vows to sanction China, pull out of WHO

Caught between hawkish advisors who wanted tough restrictions on China and moderates
more concerned about trade relations, Trump appeared to stake out a path down the mid-
dle.

His open-ended language, while leaving him plenty of room to maneuver, went further
than some analysts expected in threatening to curtail Hong Kong’s economic privileges
given Trump’s record in foreign policy of giving priority to business transactions and all
but ignoring democratic values and human rights.

Yet in stopping short of taking immediate harsh actions, he seemed to accept that those
could devastate the enclave and damage hundreds of Americanowned businesses there,
and also ratchet up tensions with Beijing that could jeopardize the so-called Phase 1 trade
deal the U.S. and China recently signed, as well as future trade talks.

Derek Scissors, a China scholar at the American Enterprise Institute in Washington, said
that Trump’s vagueness and absence of any time frame amounted to “nothing” in terms of
concrete actions. “They had steps discussed and didn’t offer a single one, even just as an
illustration,” said Scissors, who speaks often with administration officials. “The Hong
Kong-related statements just now could have been made in written form a week ago. What
have they been doing since?”

David Loevinger, an analyst for TCW Emerging Markets Group in Los Angeles and a former
senior Treasury Department official for China affairs, predicted that Beijing ’s response
would follow suit: “I’m sure they’ll match rhetoric for rhetoric. What are they going to re-
taliate against? The U.S. didn’t do anything.”

The president did take concrete action in withdrawing the United States from the WHO, an
issue that also is enmeshed in anti-China politics. Claiming the WHO did not initiate the
reforms he demanded last month, he said U.S. aid currently sent to the organization would
be redirected to other “deserving” public health groups.

“China has total control over the World Health Organization despite only paying $40 mil-
lion per year compared to what the United States has been paying, which is approximately
$450 million a year,” Trump said. “We have detailed the reforms that it must make and
engaged with them directly, but they have refused to act.”

Not only does the move deprive the main international public-health agency of its biggest
funding source in the middle of a global pandemic, it effectively bolsters the Chinese influ-
ence to which Trump had objected. When he first put the WHO on notice in mid-April,
Trump ordered a review of “60 to 90 days.”

The move got rare criticism from a Senate Republican, Lamar Alexander of Tennessee,
chairman of the Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee.

“Certainly there needs to be a good, hard look at mistakes the World Health Organization
might have made in connection with coronavirus, but the time to do that is after the crisis
has been dealt with, not in the middle of it,” Alexander said in a statement. He added that
the U.S. absence could interfere with global efforts to develop a vaccine and to prevent fu-
ture viral outbreaks.

Trump’s action aligns with a campaign strategy of presenting himself as tougher on China
than the presumptive Democratic nominee, former Vice President Joe Biden. He has de-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200530/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Trump vows to sanction China, pull out of WHO

flected criticism of his response to the coronavirus, which has now claimed more than
100,000 American lives, by blaming China, where the outbreak began.

Trump again said the WHO was complicit with China in misleading the world about the
spread of the coronavirus, though he too repeatedly played down the threat early on by cit-
ing the reassurances he’d gotten from China’s President Xi Jinping.

With the pandemic and various self-inflicted crises complicating his reelection prospects,
Trump is intent on using China as a primary foil to galvanize the nationalist fervor of his
supporters that propelled his 2016 campaign.

“He can try and blame China for all of his economic and financial problems with some de-
gree of credibility and say ‘I am the man who sees the problem and can take Beijing on,’ ”
said Harry J. Kazianis, a senior director at the conservative think tank the Center for the
National Interest.

“Trump’s goal is to make China his new Hillary Clinton — a foe he can attack day after day
to try and make the case of why he should be president. And, so far, China has made the
mistake of giving him the talking points and actions to do it.”

U.S. markets dipped Thursday afternoon on the news that Trump was planning a Friday
news conference to announce some sort of action against China. After his remarks, Wall
Street rallied somewhat. “Investors are relieved the measures are not as bad as some were
expecting,” said Bill Bishop, author of a newsletter for China watchers. “The language the
president used appears to leave some wiggle room for timing and implementation.”

At the United Nations, the United States tried for two days — so far unsuccessfully — to
push a declaration in the Security Council condemning China’s actions in Hong Kong. As a
member of the council, China can veto any such action.

Trump’s ambassador to the U.N., Kelly Craft, said Friday, “Today I asked the council one
simple question: Are we going to take the honorable stand to defend the human rights and
the dignified way of life that millions of Hong Kong citizens have enjoyed and deserve like
all freedom-loving people, or are we going to allow the Chinese Communist Party to vio-
late international law and force its will on the people of Hong Kong, who look to us to pre-
serve their way of life and their freedoms?”

‘There needs to be a good, hard look at mistakes [the WHO] might have made ... but the
time to do that is after the crisis has been dealt with.’ — Sen. Lamar Alexander (R-Tenn.)

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200530/page/1/textview 3/3
