2020. 6. 17. The threat of ‘silent spreaders’ still looms

The threat of ‘silent spreaders’ still looms
As California reopens, experts worry about asymptomatic cases.

Los Angeles Times - 27 May 2020 - A1 « By Rong-Gong Lin Il and Colleen Shalby

At Eaton Canyon, a popular Pasadena hiking area, so many people crowded the trail Satur-
day morning — many without masks and jammed close together — that rangers shut it
down for the rest of the month.

Che

 

   
 

On the Venice boardwalk, social distancing was in short supply as thousands converged on
the beachside mecca for Memorial Day weekend. Photos of the crowds made national
headlines and brought concern from officials who had urged beachgoers to wear masks
and keep at least six feet apart.

Both scenes offered a window into the challenges ahead as officials try to slowly ease stay-
at-home regulations and reopen the economy while also maintaining safety rules aimed at
preventing new COVID-19 outbreaks.

Since the coronavirus crisis began, officials have been concerned about “silent spreaders,”
people who have the virus but do not show symptoms. They could be strolling along Ocean
Front Walk or marching up a hiking trial and look perfectly healthy — but still pass along
the virus that causes COVID-19 to others.

Officials have been reopening public spaces, businesses and other institutions at a rapid
clip over the last couple of days. Los Angeles County officials announced Tuesday that re-
tail stores and religious institutions could reopen, with safety restrictions on how many
people could be inside

at one time.

Experts said that as the stay-at-home order is relaxed, observing such restrictions is going
to be essential to prevent silent spreaders from causing new outbreaks.

“Without having social distancing, we are going to definitely see some increased spikes
and transmission occurring. That’s definitely going to happen,” said Dr. Robert Kim-Far-
ley, epidemiologist and infectious disease expert at the UCLA Fielding School of Public
Health.

Venice and Eaton Canyon were not necessarily representative of how well social distancing
went during the holiday. Lifeguards at beaches in Los Angeles and Orange counties said
that they did not see major problems and that for the most part people followed rules.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200527/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. The threat of ‘silent spreaders’ still looms

Officials hope residents will continue to cooperate and warn that further reopenings de-
pend on it.

“Reopening does not mean going back to business as usual,” Los Angeles County Supervi-
sor Hilda Solis said Tuesday. “As long as community members follow safety rules, we can
continue to make more progress.”

The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimates that there’s a 20% to 50%
chance that those infected with the coronavirus never show major symptoms during their
infection. Asymptomatic people may be just as capable of transmitting the disease as in-
fected people who become visibly sick, the CDC said.

People can also transmit the coronavirus days before they show signs of sickness. This is
what scientists call “presymptomatic transmission.”

Of 402 residents and workers testing positive for the coronavirus at Los Angeles County
nursing homes, 345 had no symptoms of illness, Los Angeles County Department of Public
Health Director Barbara Ferrer said last week. In other words, 86% of people testing posi-
tive at skilled nursing facilities across the nation’s most populous county had no symp-
toms when they were tested.

This is not the only study to raise concerns about the large numbers of presymptomatic or
asymptomatic infected people. A UC San Francisco study conducted in late April found
that, among several thousand residents and workers in San Francisco’s Mission District,
62 tested positive for COVID-19 — but more than half of them, 53%, had no symptoms at
the time they were tested.

An editorial in the New England Journal of Medicine in late April called asymptomatic
transmission “the Achilles’ heel of COVID-19 pandemic control through the public health
strategies we have currently deployed.”

In another study, also published in the New England Journal of Medicine, 56% of residents
at a skilled nursing facility in Washington state’s King County who initially tested positive
showed no symptoms at the time, but most of them later did display signs of illness. It
took a median of four days for them to show symptoms.

Visibly healthy people can be omitted from efforts aimed at trying to identify infected peo-
ple, such as attempting to screen incoming airline passengers from overseas.

Further, a silent spreader can transmit the coronavirus simply by talking. Loud talking can
emit thousands of saliva droplets per second, and researchers recently found that, ina
stagnant air environment, droplets of fluid sprayed from the mouth remained in the air for
as long as eight to 14 minutes before drying up.

“These observations confirm that there is a substantial probability that normal speaking
causes airborne virus transmission in confined environments,” said the authors in a study
published May 13 by the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

That’s why it’s so important to adhere to social distancing and wearing masks, experts say.
“What we’re really trying to do is prevent transmission from talking,” Dr. George Ruther-
ford, an epidemiology and infectious disease expert at UC San Francisco, said last week.
“We're trying to ... prevent people who are asymptomatically infected from transmitting.”
It’s easier to suffocate a disease in which the symptoms are obvious, and in which infec-
tiousness occurs after symptoms show up, said Kim-Farley. For instance, there are few

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200527/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. The threat of ‘silent spreaders’ still looms

asymptomatic cases of measles, and officials can identify cases, isolate them, find the in-
fected person’s close contacts and quarantine them, snuffing out an outbreak.

But diseases in which there’s a large share of asymptomatic cases can be far harder to deal
with. For instance, for every 100 people who were infected with polio, only about one fell ill
with paralysis, Kim-Farley said.

“So it’s highly asymptomatic. So that’s why you really can’t do contact tracing for polio,
because for every case that you identify that has symptoms, there are 99 others that don’t.
So it’s silently spread in the community.”

That’s why, in the years before the polio vaccine was available on a large scale in the mid-
1950s, many parents kept their children at home, even in the summer, when the spread of
the virus seemed to peak. Polio was once one of the nation’s most feared diseases, crip-
pling more than 35,000 people a year on average.

Dr. Deborah Birx, the White House’s coronavirus response coordinator, said the problem
of silent spreaders makes it all the more important that testing be done widely, especially
in vulnerable places like nursing homes, meatpacking plants and agricultural fields, and
that people wear masks when they can’t stay six feet away from others.

“What I’m worried about is: What are we putting in place to find asymptomatic cases?”
Birx said Sunday on ABC News. “All of this proactive testing needs to be in place — and
needs to continue to be in place — because that will determine safely remaining open in
the fall.”

Experts expect a second surge of coronavirus cases in the fall, which may be made worse
by the simultaneous start of the flu season.

As of Tuesday night, there were more than 3,800 coronavirus deaths reported in California
— 56% of which have occurred among L.A. County residents. Nationally, more than
98,000 deaths have been reported.

Over the Memorial Day weekend, there were no major reported problems with crowds in
the Bay Area. San Francisco recently painted 10-foot-diameter circles in the grass at four
city parks to help groups keep away from one another. Uniformed people staffed Mission
Dolores Park to distribute masks to park guests.

But in Los Angeles County, officials lamented the crowds at the Venice Beach boardwalk,
where few were wearing masks in images shared on social media.

“The issues this weekend validate our decision to keep our county parking lots at Venice
Beach closed,” said Nicole Mooradian, spokeswoman for L.A. County’s Department of
Beaches and Harbors.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200527/page/1/textview 3/3
