2020. 6. 17. Many people return to work, but the outlook for others is hazy.

Many people return to work, but the outlook for others is
hazy.

Los Angeles Times - 7 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Shawn Donnan Donnan writes for Bloomberg.

For the Evinrude Motor Co., it all started with a boy, a girl, a lake, a rowboat and some ice
cream. It looks like it is going to end with an economic crisis born out of a pandemic.

   
  

a tT, ea FS
In 1906, according to company legend, founder Ole Evinrude was having a picnic with his
future wife, Bess, on the banks of Lake Okauchee near Milwaukee one steamy summer day
when she asked whether he would row across the lake to fetch her some ice cream.
So off Evinrude went in a rowboat. Tired and hot, on the way back the young engineer
struck an idea: an engine “to row this fandangled thing,” as a 1934 obituary recounted.
And thus was born the outboard motor familiar to generations of boat owners and fisher-
men since.
But in a May 27 letter to officials in Wisconsin the Evinrude brand’s current owners,
Canada’s Bombardier Recreational Products, brought that illustrious history to at least a
provisional end. The company’s plant outside Racine is shutting down, with 363 jobs lost.
With that the company became the latest to close for good as a result of the pandemic. It
also emerged as another piece of evidence pointing to one of the key economic storylines
of this summer.
The slow awakening of the U.S. economy from its pandemic lockdown helped provide what
on Friday became the first positive jobs headline of the summer as millions of workers fur-
loughed temporarily started their return to work in May.
Yet that also masked a grim reality for the millions still waiting to go back to work, still
waiting for benefits, or losing their jobs more permanently in places such as Sturtevant,
Wis., where Evinrude engines are made.
“The temporary furloughs in the tens of millions are just swamping any other signals right
now,” says Adam Ozimek, chief economist at online talent agency Upwork. “For the next
few months we’re just going to see millions of jobs come back online that were never really
gone, that were just on temporary furlough. And we’re going to have to look through this
noise to try see where is the economic damage still happening.”
The longer-term context remains ugly. The 2.5 million jobs added in May came largely via
a 2.7 million decrease in the number of workers on temporary layoffs. Yet 295,000 more
people were permanently laid off in May. Which means one big question left is how many
of the 15.3 million unemployed classified as temporarily jobless in May will eventually be-
come permanent victims of the crisis.
https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200607/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Many people return to work, but the outlook for others is hazy.

There is also no getting away from the large hole to be dug out of. Though the May num-
bers were encouraging, there are still 15 million more Americans unemployed than there
were a year before. The number of people with jobs — the employment share of the popu-
lation — bounced only marginally in May, to 52.8%, from a post-World War II low of
51.3% in April.

That historically bad context is why many economists are continuing to push for another
fiscal rescue package and for the extension beyond their current expiry this summer of
what have been generous unemployment benefits and other federal programs. And why
they’ve responded with alarm when some Republicans lawmakers have balked at extend-
ing them.

Whatever happens in Washington, U.S. businesses are embarking on a profound and accel-
erated reorganization this summer that is likely to lead to permanent job losses that will be
hidden by the return of temporarily furloughed workers, said Michael Strain, director of
economic policy studies at the conservative American Enterprise Institute. He expects a
“weird” summer in which economic data may present a picture rosier than the underlying
reality.

“Even if the recovery just goes gangbusters we’re still going to be in really, really bad
shape” when the summer ends, Strain says.

In the restaurant sector, for example, he expects 20% to 30% of layoffs to be permanent.
And, even if the U.S. economy gets back to 95% of what it was before the pandemic hit, it
will leave a devastating economic legacy.

Across the country, hotels are revealing plans for longer-term cuts in payrolls that point to
a slower-thananticipated recovery. So are rental car companies and others in sectors that
depend on either travel or safely hosting crowds.

In a June 3 letter to state officials, the managers of the Ritz-Carlton hotel in downtown
Cleveland said they expected the temporary furloughs and reductions in hours of 200 of
their 203 employees that began March 21 to extend beyond six months.

Although a federal program aimed at preserving jobs at small businesses, the Paycheck
Protection Program, appears to have contributed to some of the jobs gains in May, particu-
larly for restaurants, economists still worry about what comes next.

Congress last week extended from eight weeks to 24 weeks the period PPP borrowers could
use to rehire workers and lowered a requirement that 75% of the money be used for pay-
rolls to 60%. But it’s unclear how that will affect businesses that already have loans, some
of which are coming to an end.

For Power Tots, which offered in-person dance, gymnastics and yoga classes for 1- to 12-
year-olds, an $86,000 PPP loan has helped keep its 16-person team paid since March,
Chief Executive Trevor Barnett said.

But come Monday, when the loan expires along with the condition that the business main-
tain its workforce at pre-pandemic levels, Barnett says he will be laying off three people.
Other loans and tax concessions are helping the business survive. So too are subscriptions
for online classes that allow Power Tots to reach new customers outside its home base in
the Washington, D.C., area.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200607/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Many people return to work, but the outlook for others is hazy.

That doesn’t eliminate a fundamental problem, however, Barnett says. “We can’t last at
revenue down 90% forever.”

There are broader signs of how fragile many small businesses are as well. Ozimek points to
the U.S. Census’ “business pulse” survey which in the final week of May found that, even
with government financial assistance, 62% of small companies had enough cash to con-
tinue operating for only two months. Half of those said they could only go a month or less.
In Racine County, where the Evinrude plant is, the economic fortunes look decidedly
mixed.

The factory’s closure is by far the largest locally of the downturn, officials say. It’s also
happening to what, prepandemic, was a fragile local economy. The unemployment rate
surged to 15.5% in April in the Racine metropolitan area, according to official data. Yet the
area has been losing jobs since June 2019, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics.

But the layoffs are also being offset by the arrival of two new Amazon distribution facilities
expected to bring some 500 jobs, though traditionally lower-paying ones. And not all may
be lost in the longer term for the Evinrude workers.

BRP says its goal is to “repurpose” its Sturtevant plant. The company has no plans to sell
the Evinrude brand, said Elaine Arsenault, a company spokeswoman. It also has an-
nounced two mysterious new engine projects — “Project Ghost” and “Project M.”

But whether those engines will ever carry the brand born on Ole Evinrude’s row across the
lake or be assembled by the same workers losing their jobs this summer is unclear, Arse-
nault said.

Which is emblematic of a broader uncertainty hanging over the U.S. economy.

“We are definitely open to rehiring our previous workers,” she said. But “we are not sure
how many will be needed or if they will still be available.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200607/page/1/textview 3/3
