2020. 6. 17. TAKING MESSAGE TO THE STREET

TAKING MESSAGE TO THE STREET

Project, which follows mayor’s clashes with Trump, shows support for the
Black Lives Matter movement.

Los Angeles Times - 6 Jun 2020 - A‘

The words “Black Lives Matter” are painted on 16th Street leading to the White House on
Friday. The Washington project follows district Mayor Muriel Bowser’s clashes with Presi-

den
[a é

 
   

 

WASHINGTON — City workers and volunteers painted the words Black Lives Matter in
enormous bright yellow letters on the street leading to the White House, a highly visible
sign of the District of Columbia’s embrace of a protest movement that has put it at odds
with President Trump.

D.C. Mayor Muriel Bowser tweeted aerial video of the painted message shortly after it was
completed Friday. The letters and an image of the city’s flag stretch across 16th Street for
two blocks, ending just before the church where Trump staged a photo op after federal of-
ficers forcibly cleared a peaceful demonstration in Lafayette Square to make way for the
president and his entourage.

“The section of 16th street in front of the White House is now officially ‘Black Lives Matter
Plaza,’ Bowser tweeted. A sign was put up to mark the change.

The street-painting project follows Bowser’s verbal clashes with the Trump administra-
tion over the response to protests of the killing of George Floyd in Minneapolis. Bowser has
complained about the heavy-handed federal response and called for the removal of out-
of-state National Guard troops. She says their differences highlight the need for D.C. to be
a state and have more control over its internal affairs.

While not addressing the painted words, Trump continued his attacks on Bowser in tweets
Friday.

“The incompetent Mayor of Washington, D.C., @MayorBowser, who’s budget is totally out
of control and is constantly coming back to us for ‘handouts,’ is now fighting with the Na-
tional Guard, who saved her from great embarrassment over the last number of nights,”
he tweeted. “If she doesn’t treat these men and women well, then we’ll bring in a different
group of men and women!”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200606/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. TAKING MESSAGE TO THE STREET

The local chapter of Black Lives Matter said it did not support painting the street and took
a swipe at Bowser. “This is performative and a distraction from her active counter orga-
nizing to our demands to decrease the police budget and invest in the community,” it said
on Twitter.

On Thursday, as the protests turned peaceful, Bowser ended a curfew imposed after people
broke into businesses over the weekend and Monday. A large rally is expected in the city on
Saturday.

The mayor tweeted a letter from House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D-San Francisco), who
wrote the president to express alarm that protesters were being confronted by armed fed-
eral agents and officers, many of them with their identities and agencies obscured.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200606/page/1/textview 2/2
