2020. 6. 17. President taunts protesters in tweets

President taunts protesters in tweets

He says ‘vicious dogs,’ ‘ominous weapons’ would await marchers if they
reached White House grounds.

Los Angeles Times - 31 May 2020 - A1 - By Del Quentin Wilber

Trump talks of “vicious dogs” and “ominous weapons” if rallies were to reach White
House grounds.

a

 

WASHINGTON — President Trump on Saturday taunted demonstrators who gathered
around the White House on Friday night to protest his response to the killing of an un-
armed black man by a police officer in Minneapolis, and appeared to encourage his own
supporters to gather tonight at the executive mansion.

In a series of tweets criticized for escalating tensions and potentially sparking violence,
Trump dismissed the protesters as “professionally managed” and praised the Secret Ser-
vice’s response, saying agents and officers handled the situation with restraint.

When protesters “got too frisky or out of line, [agents] would quickly come down on them,
hard — didn’t know what hit them. The front line was replaced with fresh agents, like
magic. Big crowd, professionally organized, but nobody came close to breaching the
fence.”

If demonstrators had gotten onto the White House grounds, the president said, they would
have been met by “vicious dogs” and “ominous weapons.” He said Secret Service agents
and officers, particularly the less experienced ones, relished the chance to engage with
protesters. “Many Secret Service agents just waiting for action,” he tweeted, saying he’d
been told by Secret Service supervisors, “We put the young ones on the front line, sir, they
love it, and ... good practice.”

In a separate tweet, he seemed to invite his supporters to show up Saturday night, setting
the stage for a possible confrontation with protesters. “Tonight, I understand, is MAGA
NIGHT AT THE WHITE HOUSE???” he wrote, referring to his campaign slogan “Make
America Great Again.”

Democrats accused Trump of escalating tensions as protests erupted nationwide in re-
sponse to the killing Monday of George Floyd at the hands of Minneapolis police. Demon-
strators clashed with police and damaged property in cities including Los Angeles, Oak-
land, Louisville, Ky., Atlanta and New York.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/2020053 1/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. President taunts protesters in tweets

Floyd was killed while handcuffed and lying on the ground as one of the officers, Derek
Chauvin, kneeled on his neck. Chauvin was arrested Friday and charged with third-degree
murder and manslaughter; charges are expected against the three other officers involved,
the county attorney in Minneapolis has said.

Washington, D.C., Mayor Muriel Bowser, a Democrat whom Trump attacked Saturday for
not doing enough to respond to the protests, said on Twitter her “police department will
always protect DC and all who are in it whether I agree with them.”

While Trump “hides behind his fence afraid/alone,” the mayor said, “I stand w/ people
peacefully exercising their First Amendment Right after the murder of #GeorgeFloyd &
hundreds of years of institutional racism. There are no vicious dogs & ominous weapons.
There is just a scared man. Afraid/alone...”

Sen. Kamala Harris (DCalif.) tweeted: “The occupant of the White House is once again in-
citing violence. Don’t listen to him.”

On his way to Kennedy Space Center in Florida to watch the launch of SpaceX’s Falcon 9
sending astronauts to the International Space Station, Trump told reporters that he was
not sure if any of his supporters would show up at the White House. “By the way, they love
African American people. They love black people,” he told reporters.

He said local leaders have to get tougher on protesters or U.S. troops might be needed in
restive cities. “We have our military ready, willing and able if they ever want to call our
military,” Trump said. “We can have troops on the ground very quickly . ... There’s a lot of
radical left, bad people, and they’ve got to be taught that you can’t do this,” he said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/2020053 1/page/1/textview 2/2
