2020. 6. 17. Schools seen as polling option

Schools seen as polling option

State elections officials propose a plan for safer in-person voting

Los Angeles Times : 26 May 2020 : A1 - BY JOHN MYERS

SACRAMENTO — Elections officials across California, seeking a way to offer in-person
voting in November with strict coronavirus protections, are urging lawmakers to close
schools in the days leading up to and including election day and allow campus gyms and
auditoriums to be used.

 

The proposal comes as county officials face tight timelines to begin preparing for the Nov.
3 election and as the process has been overshadowed by Gov. Gavin Newsom’s order earlier
this month to mail a ballot to every California voter.

Newsom?’s effort is now mired in a legal battle with Republicans, who insist only the Legis-
lature has the power to

change election rules. Lawsuits from the Republican National Committee and former Rep.
Darrell Issa, a Republican from Vista, are challenging the May 8 executive order and Presi-
dent Trump has continued to insist, without proof, that voting by mail is a process rife
with fraud.

The effort by local elections officials seeks to find rules for those who will vote in person, a
process they argue cannot be done without a plan that allows voters several days to partic-
ipate and venues that are much larger than those used in the past.

‘“‘We wanted to provide a solution” for safe voting sites, said Joe Holland, registrar of
voters in Santa Barbara County and president of the California Assn. of Clerks and Elected
Officials. “Schools have facilities that are big enough to accommodate in-person voting
with the COVID-19 environment that we have to deal with.”

Elections officials say the four weekdays in question — Oct. 30, a Friday, through Nov. 4, a
Wednesday — could easily be designated as “inservice” days, during which teachers and
personnel are on campus but students are not.

Holland said public health requirements, especially regarding size and social distancing,
would make most traditional polling places unworkable. Schools also would have more
consistent access for disabled voters, he said, and would be found easily by voters seeking
to cast their ballots.

Several prominent education groups had not heard about the proposal when contacted Fri-
day.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200526/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Schools seen as polling option

State Sen. Tom Umberg (D-Santa Ana), chairman of the Senate’s elections committee, said
the best path forward would be, first, to see what could be agreed to without a mandate
from Sacramento.

“It does seem that schools are a community asset that is accessible,” Umberg said. “That’s
a conversation to be had between local school officials and local election officials.”
Secretary of State Alex Padilla suggested Friday that the idea had merit.

“Schools and colleges alone will not provide all the voting locations we will need this
November, but they have historically been a major source of voting locations, and we will
need them again this fall,” he said.

“The COVID-19 pandemic has presented an enormous challenge for county elections offi-
cials to adjust their operations.”

Any decision would come later than Newsom envisioned. His executive order requiring
counties to mail ballots to the state’s roughly 21 million voters called for clear guidelines
by the end of May on how counties would provide traditional in-person voting. At best, a
decision is now unlikely before mid-June.

There were more than 2.7 million Californians who voted in person for the March presi-
dential primary — more ballots than those cast in most states’ elections. But far more Cal-
ifornia voters, 72% of those who participated, chose to fill out a ballot sent to them in the
mail.

A survey released Thursday by a team of researchers from USC, UC San Diego and UC
Riverside came to a similar conclusion, finding almost 72% of eligible voters prefer either
to put their ballot in the mail in November or drop it off at a location in their community.
Those who don’t are more often found in communities of color or are voters with physical
disabilities.

Wilma Franco, executive director of the Southeast Los Angeles Collaborative, told those a...
tending an election webinar last week that changing those voter habits would be hard.
“It’s really going to take new ways of reaching our community,” she said during the event
sponsored by the nonprofit Future of California Elections.

Exactly how many inperson voting centers will be required remains a point of contention.
Fifteen California counties, choosing to embrace an optional 2016 state election law that
moves away from traditional polling places, provide one location for every 10,000 voters in
the final four days of an election — sites that offer a variety of voter services. But 43 other
counties have chosen not to opt into that system and may find that formula difficult.

In its letter to the Legislature, the association of elections officials suggested one location
for every 15,000 voters.

Holland said even that standard would be challenging in some communities, especially
given that the most reliable elections workers — Californians in their 60s and 70s — are
also those considered to be most at risk during the pandemic.

“Can I, in good conscience, even ask them to be a poll worker in November?” Holland said.
For those who choose to vote in person in November, ideally bringing their mailed ballots
with them, a number of changes are expected. Dean Logan, the registrar of voters in Los
Angeles County, said Thursday during the election webinar that face coverings and gloves
would be offered to Angelenos who used local voting centers in the fall.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200526/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Schools seen as polling option

L.A. County experienced a number of problems with in-person voting in March, but Logan
told election advocates during Thursday’s event that his staff believed the voting experi-
ence could be improved upon in November.

“We have to build a capacity for that,” Logan said about in-person voting. “We need to be
more direct and more emphatic in informing voters that we’re open and available.”

Using schools for a fourday voting experience could hinge on money. Elections officials are
already insisting November election rules can’t be implemented without additional state
dollars, and schools may be hesitant to change their schedules without some sort of com-
pensation.

Funding for K-12 schools depends, in part, on daily attendance numbers.

Holland acknowledged the challenges but said the coronavirus crisis could be remembered
as creating a partnership that could be used in future elections too.

“Tt would be a huge achievement for democracy in California,” he said. “We would be part-
ners, and the voters and the citizens of California would greatly benefit.”

Republicans, meanwhile, continue to take aim at mail balloting. Republican National Com-
mittee Chairwoman Ronna McDaniel announced the national party’s lawsuit on Sunday
through Twitter.

“His radical plan is a recipe for disaster that would create more opportunities for fraud &
destroy the confidence Californians deserve to have in their elections,” McDaniel said.

The lawsuit accuses Newsom of a “brazen power grab” that would “violate eligible citi-
zens’ right to vote.”

Responding to the lawsuit late Sunday, Padilla said on Twitter that expanding voting by
mail is not a “partisan issue.”

“This lawsuit is just another part of Trump’s political smear campaign against voting by
mail. We will not let this virus be exploited for voter suppression,” he wrote.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200526/page/1/textview 3/3
