2020. 6. 17. Who will get blamed if virus soars?

Who will get blamed if virus soars?

Though officials point to Newsom’s advisory for when counties can reopen,
time will tell if the pace is too fast.

Los Angeles Times - 10 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Rong-Gong Lin II, Hannah Fry and Luke Money

The order from Orange County’s health officer was simple and far from radical: Residents
should wear cloth face coverings while in a public place, at work or visiting a business to

 

But almost immediately, Dr. Nichole Quick faced a fierce backlash from residents and some
elected officials, who questioned the need for masks. People came to a Board of Supervi-
sors meeting carrying a poster with Quick’s photo on it with a Hitler mustache on her face,
and swastikas. Then, she got a death threat and required a security detail.

Amid mounting criticism, Quick resigned this week, a seeming political casualty as Cali-
fornia attempts to revive its economy while preventing new outbreaks of COVID-19, the
disease caused by the coronavirus.

Some officials insist the increasingly rapid reopening of the economy in California over the
last few weeks has been driven by careful health considerations. But there are also political
pressures as well. Some businesses battered by months of stay-at-home orders are push-
ing to open their doors, while some residents object to the government telling them to
wear

masks and how far apart to stand from one another.

At the same time, there is the question of who gets blamed if the pace of reopening leads to
a major surge of cases and deaths.

Los Angeles County remains one of the hardest-hit counties in California, with more than
2,700 dead, accounting for more than 57% of the state’s death toll, despite being home to
onequarter of the state’s population. Yet the nation’s most populous county is moving
faster than the San Francisco Bay Area in reopening.

Gov. Gavin Newsom has emphasized that the decision to reopen on an accelerated pace is
one made by local leaders.

“Let me just clarify something: The local health director made the decision in L.A. today.
The state of California did not,” Newsom said on May 29 when L.A. County filed paperwork
with the state that allowed it to reopen restaurants for inperson dining and hair salons.
“That question is foundationally a question for local health directors and local county offi-
cials.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200610/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. Who will get blamed if virus soars?

Top officials in L.A. have pointed to Newsom’s guidelines as part of the reason they felt it
was the right time to proceed. Mayor Eric Garcetti said at the time that deaths and hospi-
talizations had been trending down in L.A. County and it was important to care both about
public health and economic strain.

The chairwoman of the L.A. County Board of Supervisors, Kathryn Barger, said in an inter-
view that county leaders take responsibility for the local reopening strategy.

The state “gave us a green light. But he’s right. I mean, ultimately, it’s up to our public
health officer,” she said. “Everything we’ve done has been based on the data brought for-
ward by [the Los Angeles County Department of] Public Health, and that’s been brought
forward based on the criteria set by the state,” she said. “And this board has been very
careful to make sure that we do it in a deliberate and careful fashion, based on public
health.”

Only time will tell whether L.A. County is moving too fast.

There is no steady narrative of what’s going on: County scientists say the effective trans-
mission rate of the disease has increased recently. The number of weekly cases diagnosed
last week fell 12% compared with the previous week.

But for the first time in weeks, there was no significant decrease in weekly hospitalizations
involving the coronavirus.

And weekly deaths in Los Angeles County rose 12% last week compared with the previous
week.

The vast majority of Californians are still vulnerable to infection. The latest study estimat-
ing the percentage of the population that hasn’t yet been infected in L.A. County suggests
as much as 98% of people in the nation’s most populous county have not yet been infected
with the coronavirus, which is deadlier and more infectious than the seasonal flu.

Barbara Ferrer, director of public health for L.A. County, has defended the region’s reopen-
ing plan but said residents and businesses need to follow safety rules.

“(At some point, we have to reopen,” Ferrer said. “The name of the game is to make sure
that when sectors are reopening, we’re taking every single precaution we can.”

Dr. Peter Chin-Hong, professor and infectiousdiseases specialist at UC San Francisco, said
that, while reopening restaurants doesn’t make him nervous, the idea of resuming large
gatherings, such as congregations meeting at churches, gives him cause for concern.

“Tt’s really about the size of the crowd,” Chin-Hong said. People should be circumspect
about having vulnerable people like the elderly and people with cancer, heart disease and
other underlying conditions visiting reopened areas, he said.

Super-spreading events that have transmitted the coronavirus to many people have oc-
curred at churches, as well as other crowded events, such as conventions and Mardi Gras
celebrations.

Among 92 people who attended a church in Arkansas in early March, 35 were later con-
firmed to be infected, and three died; the first two people found to be infected were the
pastor and his wife, according to a report published by the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention.

The San Francisco Bay Area is taking a much slower, gradual approach and is opening only
outdoor dining as an interim step before opening indoor dining.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200610/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. Who will get blamed if virus soars?

In Northern California’s most populous county and the home to Silicon Valley, Santa Clara
County, only outdoor dining and outdoor religious services were allowed to resume on Fri-
day, along with in-store shopping. Hair salons have not been allowed to reopen.

Dr. Sara Cody, the Santa Clara County health officer, said infection rates across the county
have been low and stable for some time. However, there has been a slight bump up in coro-
navirus hospitalization numbers, likely related to Santa Clara County’s modest reopening
efforts in midMay, where stores reopened for pickup service, Cody said Monday.

Cody has faced some criticism for her cautious approach to reopening, but not to the de-
gree her counterpart in Orange County, Quick, experienced.

Her mask order in late May faced immediate challenge from residents and elected officials
who questioned the need for the widespread use of face coverings as businesses in the re-
gion reopened. That ire at times was directly aimed at Quick.

The Orange County Sheriff’s Department provided a security detail for Quick after she re-
ceived what officials deemed to be a death threat during a county Board of Supervisors
meeting last month.

During the meeting, a woman who identified herself as an attorney disparaged Quick’s ex-
perience in the medical field and read her home address aloud, saying she planned to take a
group to Quick’s home and “do calisthenics in masks on her front doorstep” in an attempt
to prove that face coverings are unsafe.

The woman echoed what other critics had said about face coverings posing a danger to
people’s oxygen levels.

“When people start dropping like flies, and they will,” the woman said at the meeting, “I
am going to ask every first responder in a 30-mile radius to roll lights and sirens to her
front door, and you had best pray they can revive whoever went down because if they can’t
... | will be asking the O.C. D.A.’s office to charge it as murder.”

Later that week, Orange County Board of Supervisors Chair Michelle Steel condemned the
threat, saying, “It should never happen again.”

“No one deserves to be threatened or intimidated the way she was,” Steel said at the time.
Health experts say face coverings can help slow the spread of the coronavirus by keeping
infectious oral droplets of an infected person from spraying out while talking to others.
Quick, who was hired as the county’s health officer last June, could not be reached for
comment Tuesday.

The county agreed to pay Quick $75,000 in severance in exchange for her decision to vol-
untarily resign, according to a settlement and release agreement signed Monday. The
agreement notes that County Executive Officer Frank Kim won’t disparage work done by
Quick while she was employed with the county. In exchange, Quick agreed not to criticize
the county or the Board of Supervisors.

Kim characterized the agreement Tuesday as “fairly standard practice for the county”
when it comes to executive-level employees.

“T had a very good working relationship and I thought she did very good work for the
county as our health officer,” he said during an interview.

Kim added that he was surprised and disappointed by the resignation. He said neither he
nor any Board of Supervisors member encouraged Quick to resign.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200610/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. Who will get blamed if virus soars?

He declined to elaborate on her reasons for doing so, aside from saying, “I do believe that
all of the challenges of the job weighed in on her decision.”

As of Tuesday night, 185 people had died in Orange County from COVID-19. There was an
average of nearly 400 people in Orange County hospitalized with confirmed or suspected
coronavirus infections every day last week, up from nearly 300 in early May.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200610/page/1/textview 4/4
