2020. 6. 17. With 100,000 lives lost, U.S. leads world in virus toll

With 100,000 lives lost, U.S. leads world in virus toll

Pandemic has disrupted lives and the economy. It has also laid bare how
Trump’s response has divided nation.

Los Angeles Times - 28 May 2020 - A1 - By Laura King and Jackie Calmes

WASHINGTON — The nation’s coronavirus death toll surpassed 100,000 in less than four
months on Wednesday, a heart-rending inflection point in a pandemic that has profoundly
altered Americans’ daily lives, ravaged the U.S. economy and put the country’s bare-
knuckle political disunity on display for all the world to see.

 

 

a
=

 

 

The first U.S. death was reported Feb. 29, a patient in the Seattle area, but several earlier
fatalities — not attributed at the time to COVID-19, the illness caused by the coronavirus
— have since come to light. Today, the United States, despite its wealth and scientific
prowess, has the world’s highest numbers of both cases and deaths, according to Johns
Hopkins University’s widely cited global tracker.

The efforts to contain the pandemic have closed businesses, sent unemployment to De-
pression-era levels, spurred Congress to pass four relief measures totaling nearly $3 tril-
lion, with more promised, and upended the year’s political contests for the White House
and control of Congress.

The loss of lives reflected in the tragic new milestone has put President Trump’s reelection
at risk, as numerous polls show widespread belief among voters that he has mismanaged
the crisis — from his early denials of a problem and promise of zero deaths to his erratic
stewardship of the response once the death count began.

Spurred partly by Trump’s defiant rhetoric and example, even the re

sponses recommended by his own public health experts — social distancing, wearing
masks, staying home — have come to divide Americans along partisan lines after an initial
period of broad adherence to the unprecedented limits on their way of life. He has urged
the nation to “reopen” and has consistently refused to wear a mask in public, going so far
as to mock his Democratic rival for the presidency, former Vice President Joe Biden, for

doing so at a Memorial Day observance.
https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200528/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. With 100,000 lives lost, U.S. leads world in virus toll

Yet the state and local efforts nationwide since midMarch to limit social interaction, to
shut down schools and all but essential businesses and to encourage millions of Americans
to work from home did limit the spread of infections, studies and disease models sug-
gested.

In mid-May, a research team at Columbia University reported that if such measures had
been taken a week earlier, about 36,000 fewer people would have died; had the restrictions
been imposed two weeks earlier, on March 1, about 54,000 fewer deaths would have oc-
curred.

In early March, however, Trump was opposed to such steps. On March 9 he suggested in a
tweet that the coronavirus infection was no worse than a seasonal flu and added, “Nothing
is shut down, life & the economy go on. At this moment there are 546 confirmed cases of
CoronaVirus, with 22 deaths. Think about that!”

Unrepentant about such statements, on Tuesday the president claimed without evidence
on Twitter that but for his early actions to restrict travel from China, 1.5 million to 2 mil-
lion lives would have been lost.

As elsewhere in the world, elderly people and those rendered vulnerable by preexisting
medical conditions have accounted for most U.S. deaths. But the virus has sickened all age
groups, including children afflicted by what remains a little-understood inflammatory
syndrome.

Quickly, New York City became the nation’s focal point of disease, and Los Angeles was an
early hot spot as well, partly reflecting both cities’ status as hubs of international travel.
After New York’s springtime season of death — marked by the sight of refrigerated trucks
serving as temporary morgues and drone footage of mass graves on an island that typically
was a repository of unclaimed dead — Gov. Andrew Cuomo saw progress Saturday as the
state reported daily deaths Friday had dropped to 84, the first day since late March that the
toll dipped below 100.

Since mysterious cases of pneumonia began surfacing in the Chinese city of Wuhan late
last year, the coronavirus has hopscotched the globe, with more than 5.6 million con-
firmed cases and more than 354,000 deaths worldwide. Initial attempts at secrecy by
China’s authoritarian government stifled early efforts to understand and contain the virus.
By mid-February, the virus had leaped from Asia to Europe, where it began devastating
northern Italy before spreading to Spain, France and elsewhere. A deadly outbreak raged in
Iran. Countries began imposing travel bans, but not before international travelers — con-
tinent-hopping business people and tourists, cruise passengers and crews — seeded far-
flung eruptions of disease.

On March 11, the World Health Organization designated the outbreak a pandemic. Two da...
later, Trump declared a national emergency.

The virus’ rapid spread was met with a hodgepodge of efforts to contain it, a worldwide
phenomenon that was echoed in the patchwork of responses in U.S. states. Success varied
widely. As hospitalizations and deaths accelerated, Trump veered from claiming absolute
authority to telling states to largely fend for themselves in providing testing and crucial
medical supplies.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200528/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. With 100,000 lives lost, U.S. leads world in virus toll

By mid-March, the world was locking itself down. Across the United States, schools closed,
workplaces emptied, businesses shuttered. The stock market cratered, wobbled, spiked,
then ebbed anew, as traders repeatedly seized on any report of a potential treatment or
vaccine to send stockbuying up even as the losses of jobs and lives mounted.

Healthcare workers, from doctors to hospital cleaners to nursing home aides, found them-
selves on the pandemic’s front lines, with some of them documenting firsthand the agony
of watching patients die, separated from their families by strict protocols meant to stem
infections.

Working-class Americans including grocery clerks, bus drivers and meatpackers were
called “essential” workers but realized that their jobs put them at previously unimaginable
peril.

As the nation neared the threshold of 100,000 deaths over a week that included Memorial
Day, when the nation mourns its war dead, the somber symbolism was lost on few. Among
the victims have been many aged veterans.

Yet the holiday weekend, which traditionally has marked the start of summer, this year
seemed to signal long-homebound Americans’ impatience with social distancing. Many
sought a return to normality at the seashore, at lakesides and in countless parks and back-
yards — many without taking the recommended precautions.

“Pray and think about those that passed in our former wars,” urged Tom Bossert, Trump’s
former Homeland Security advisor, in an interview Sunday on ABC’s “This Week,” “but
also about those that passed in the last three months.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200528/page/1/textview 3/3
