2020. 6. 17. School reopening plan will erase the usual routine

School reopening plan will erase the usual routine

County guidelines suggest vast changes, including masks, one-way hall-
ways and lunch at desks.

Los Angeles Times - 27 May 2020 - A1 - By Howard Blume and Sonali Kohli

Sixteen students to a class. One-way hallways. Students lunch at their desks. Children
could get one ball to play with — alone. Masks are required. A staggered school day brings
on new schedules to juggle.

  

 

 

These campus scenarios could play out based on new Los Angeles County school reopening
guidelines released Wednesday. This planning document will affect 2 million students and
their families as educators undertake a challenge forced on them by the coronavirus crisis:
fundamentally redesigning the traditional school day.

The safe reopening of schools in California and throughout the nation compels the
reimagining — or abandoning — of long-held traditions and goals of the American school
day, where play time, socialization and hands-on support have long been essential to the
learning equation in everything from science labs and team sports to recess and group
work.

The Los Angeles County Office of Education guidelines offer an early top-tobottom
glimpse at the massive and costly changes that will be required to reboot campuses serving
students from preschool through 12th grade, critical to reopening California. The 45-page
framework was developed through the work of county

staffers, outside advisors and representatives from 23 county school systems, each of
which must develop its own reopening plan.

“Our main priority is health and safety,” said Debra Duardo, the superintendent for the
L.A. County Office of Education, which provides services and financial oversight for the
county’s 80 school systems. “Unfortunately some of the things that children could enjoy in
the past, they’re not going to be able to do that.”

When campuses closed in mid-March, school systems scrambled to develop a new style of
education on the fly — one that relied on “distance learning.” Administrators quickly

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200527/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. School reopening plan will erase the usual routine

handed out computers and internet hot spots. Teachers trained on Zoom and other online
platforms. Parents oversaw learning at home, even as they faced economic hardship.
Despite these Herculean efforts, school leaders and teachers report uneven student en-
gagement and impediments to learning at home, underscoring the importance of an aca-
demically robust return to campus — even as the governor’s proposed budget envisions a
cut for schools of about 10%.

A walk-through Tuesday at Cerritos Elementary School in Glendale put the complexities
into focus.

The campus has the natural advantage of multiple outdoor spaces: The doors for the
youngest students’ classrooms open directly onto a circular courtyard leading to a student
garden — no need for these students to go through hallways to get to class.

The guidelines recommend making use of outdoor spaces — where the threat of virus
transmission is lower.

But how exactly do you keep kindergartners and other youngsters six feet apart?

“That is a big challenge because our nature is to play together and the socialization is so
important at that age,” said Cerritos Principal Perla Chavez-Fritz. “Maybe hula hoops and
things that the students can play together alone.”

Then there’s the challenge of requiring students, especially little ones, to wear masks all
day — if they’re fiddling or taking them on and off, the sanitation benefit declines. Some
students with disabilities or health issues cannot safely wear masks.

The other side of Cerritos Elementary opens onto a grassy field adjacent to a covered eating
area — additional helpful outdoor space. But the massive, brightly hued play structure is
likely to be off-limits.

Under the guidelines, the spacious eating area could be used for some classroom activities,
but not for the traditional lunch period gathering. It’s safer for students to remain in class,
eating at their desks, spaced six feet apart.

The county said school districts could consider hybrid learning models, with students
spending half the school day at home to reduce class size, and perhaps eliminating lunch
period altogether — by sending students home with a bagged meal.

Enter second-grade teacher Emily Miranda’s classroom and other issues become obvious.
Her classroom opens onto an interior hall — which new guidelines suggest be turned into
a oneway passage to limit jostling.

Inside, the room is frozen in mid-March, walls festooned with student work for display at
an open house that never happened: book reports on Dr. Seuss; crayon and collage pieces
for the Fine Arts Day display. Book orders were due March 13. A girl’s pencil box is open
and askew.

Student name tags show that Ryan, Lucas, Addison and Maya sat facing one another with
their desks pushed together. That wouldn’t work for the fall. The guidelines suggest facing
all desks the same way, six feet apart.

Plus, there are too many desks — far more than the 16 the guidelines recommend ina
standard-sized California classroom. And there’s just too much furniture, including a stu-
dent activity center at a kidney-shaped table. That’s too much to keep clean, to disinfect
and to allow for physical distancing.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200527/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. School reopening plan will erase the usual routine

The guidelines suggest that administrators rent storage pods for unusable furniture.
“We've measured,” said Vivian Ekchian, the superintendent of Glendale Unified School
District. “We’re going through all the different scenarios to see how many tables, how
many chairs, how many desks, how many students would have to be in a classroom for us
to remain safe and make sure that instruction still occurs.”

At Cerritos Elementary, all classrooms have sinks, but that’s not true everywhere. The
guidelines recommend building time into the schedule for frequent hand washing.

The carpet on Miranda’s floor — where students recently huddled during storytime to lis-
ten to her read such books as “Horrible Harry,” “The Frog Prince,” “The Mangrove Tree”
— may also have to go because it’s too small for social distancing. And those books — part
of Miranda’s huge classroom library — are impossible to sanitize daily, and may have to be
packed away.

Students may have to read online, Ekchian said, adding, “We will be purchasing for our
students their own personal equipment. So whether it’s their masks or crayons and pen-
cils, whatever is appropriate at that age level. And it might include a basketball which they
can use. It might not be in a team sport.”

Ekchian can’t imagine having to reduce staff because of proposed budget cuts. She’s
thinking that necessary new hires might include bathroom attendants, to keep those areas
properly supervised.

So many unknowns remain, said Alejandro Ruvalcaba, superintendent of the Rosemead
School District, south of Pasadena.

If the county is in Phase 5 of reopening, school will be closest to normal, he said. Although
the district also must be ready, for example, to handle more restrictive openings and split
schedules.

‘We don’t know whether it’s going to be every other day,” Ruvalcaba said. “We don’t
know whether it’s going to be AM/PM, and it might be a combination of both.”

And one instructional plan won’t be enough, said Lancaster School District Supt. Michele
Bowers, who served on the task force along with Ekchian and Ruvalcaba.

“Not everyone wants their child to be in a school setting,” said Bowers. “Some need a
school setting for various reasons. Some are very comfortable with a blended model.”

The uncertain timeline of restructured schools is worrisome, said UCLA education profes-
sor Pedro Noguera.

Schools offer an important environment where children learn to socialize with one an-
other, he said.

The diminishing of play, lunch table chatter and personal contact could hurt students if
such measures continue in the long term.

“There are a lot of kids that are more social, and they look to school for their friends and
their teachers.” Noguera said, “and they’re going to be at a huge disadvantage.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200527/page/1/textview 3/3
