2020. 6. 17. Reopening: Worth the price?

Reopening: Worth the price?
States with varying restrictions show no clear case patterns

Los Angeles Times - 13 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Jenny Jarvie, Ryan Menezes and Jaweed Kaleem

ATLANTA — Months after its arrival in the United States, the novel coronavirus is cutting
a haphazard path across the country, surging in some states but dwindling in just as many
others.

 

 

Despite a polarized national debate about reopening the economy, no clear divide has
emerged between states that lifted restrictions early and those that took more time.

A Los Angeles Times analysis of data on new COVID-19 cases found that the situation is
improving in 24 states, getting worse in 23 and holding steady in four.

Hot spots are emerging across the Southeast, the Southwest and the West Coast, with
states as diverse as Arizona, California, Oregon and

NEW YORK — Take the stairs, not the elevator, down from your hotel room. Encourage
people to bring their own food and drinks to your cookout. Use hand sanitizer after
banking at an ATM. Call ahead to restaurants and nail salons to make sure staff are wearing
face coverings. And no high-fives — or even elbow bumps — at the gym.

These are some of the tips in long-awaited guidance from U.S. health officials about how to
reduce the risk of coronavirus infection for Americans who are attempting some sem-
blance of normal life.

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention posted the guidelines Friday, along with a
second set for organizing and attending big gatherings such as concerts, sporting events,
protests and political rallies.

But the guidelines are “not intended to endorse any particular type of event,” the CDC’s
Dr. Jay Butler said in a Friday call with reporters.

The staging and attendance of such events should be in accordance with what local health
officials are advising, based on how much the coronavirus is spreading in a particular
community, he added.

The guidelines are long overdue, some health experts say.

Julia Marcus, an infectious disease researcher at Harvard Medical School, has likened stay-
at-home suggestions to “abstinenceonly” messaging and has pressed for advice to help
people minimize risk. She said she was delighted by the CDC’s tips.

“T think it’s a huge step in the right direction,” Marcus said. “These guidelines are really
directed toward ordinary Americans trying to make decisions about risk every day.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200613/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Reopening: Worth the price?

But there are notable omissions. There’s nothing about precautions to take before going to
church, no guidance about dating and sex, and no explicit advice on a topic that some doc-
tors say they get asked all the time: Is it OK to take the kids to visit grandparents?
“Visiting grandma is something I must address three times a week, “said Dr. William
Schaffner, a Vanderbilt University infectious disease expert.

“My empathy goes out to the CDC. It’s very, very difficult to have a precise answer for ev-
ery circumstance,” he added.

Stay-at-home orders, school shutdowns and business closings were followed by a national
flattening in the rate of new cases. In recent weeks, many states have started reopening as
they face pressure to get the pandemic-damaged economy going again. And cases are ris-
ing in nearly half the states, according to an Associated Press analysis.

The CDC has put out many sets of guidelines, including some for churches, camps, schools
and transit agencies. But until now, the organization hasn’t offered specific advice to peo-
ple trying to decide whether to take vacations, get their nails done, host barbecues, visit a
bank or library, go out to eat or exercise at a gym.

The CDC’s director, Dr. Robert Redfield, called the new guidelines “commonsense sugges-
tions,” not mandates.

State or local governments may want to reimpose stricter measures if new outbreaks oc-
cur, but that’s a call for them to make, CDC officials said.

The guidelines also offer a list of questions people should consider before going out, and
some things to think about in particular situations.

For example, it suggests that house parties be held outside, guests be greeted with a wave
instead of a hug and that everyone bring their own food and drinks.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200613/page/1/textview 2/2
