2020. 6. 17. $1-million bail for cop in Floyd death

$1-million bail for cop in Floyd death

Los Angeles Times - 9 Jun 2020 - A‘ - Associated press

Derek Chauvin, charged with murder, appears in court via video from prison.
MINNEAPOLIS — A judge on Monday set $1-million bail for a Minneapolis police officer
charged with second-degree murder in George Floyd’s death.

Derek Chauvin, 44, said almost nothing during an 11-minute hearing in which he appeared
on closed-circuit television from Minnesota’s maximum security prison in Oak Park
Heights. His attorney, Eric Nelson, did not contest the bail — raised from the $500,000
initially set in the case — and didn’t address the substance of the charges.

Nelson didn’t speak with reporters afterward. Chauvin’s next appearance was set for June
29.

Chauvin is also charged with third-degree murder and second-degree manslaughter in
Floyd’s May 25 death. Floyd, a handcuffed black man, died after the white police officer
pressed his knee into his neck for nearly nine minutes even after Floyd stopped moving
and pleading for air.

Floyd’s death set off protests in Minneapolis that swiftly spread to cities around the U.S.
and the globe.

Chauvin and three other officers on the scene were fired the day after Floyd’s death.
Chauvin is being held at a state prison in Oakdale. The other three officers — J. Kueng,
Thomas Lane and Tou Thao — are charged with aiding and abetting. They remain in the
Hennepin County Jail on $750,000 bond.

Lane’s family has set up a website seeking donations to help him post bond.

The site highlights Lane’s relative lack of experience — he had only recently completed his
probationary period — and his questions to Chauvin about whether Floyd should be rolled
onto his side. It also noted his volunteer work.

Floyd’s death has ignited calls to reform the Minneapolis Police Department, which com-
munity activists have long accused of entrenched racial discrimination and brutality.

A majority of Minneapolis City Council members said Sunday that they favor disbanding
the department entirely, though they have yet to offer concrete plans for what would re-
place it.

“Nobody is saying we want to abolish health or safety,” Council Member Alondra Cano told
WCCOAM on Monday.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200609/page/1/textview 4/1
