2020. 6. 17. Green light for a wider opening in L.A.

Green light for a wider opening in L.A.

Haircuts and in-person dining allowed despite county being focus of pan-
demic in state.

Los Angeles Times - 30 May 2020 - A1 - By Alex Wigglesworth, Colleen Shalby and Andrea Chang

Despite having the most serious coronavirus outbreak in California, Los Angeles County on
Friday was given the go-ahead to reopen restaurants for inperson dining and resume ser-
vices at barbershops and hair salons in the biggest test of whether the state can reopen the
economy without causing COVID-19 to spread more rapidly.

 

    

 

Gov. Gavin Newsom approved a request by L.A. County leaders to begin the next phase of
reopening and businesses could be up and running this weekend.

Many smaller counties across California already allow restaurants to start serving meals
again with social distancing and other safety regulations. But those regions have been hit
far less hard than Los Angeles County, and health officials said there is a clear risk that L.A.
County’s move could fuel more outbreaks if rules are not strictly followed.

Over the past few weeks, California’s first-in-the-nation stay-at-home order has been
rapidly loosened as Newsom and others said the coronavirus threat had eased. The order is
credited with helping California avoid the huge death tolls of hot spots such as New York
and New Jersey but has devastated the economy.

While many have praised the relaxations of the stayat-home order, there have been grow-
ing concerns that it is coming too early for urban areas still vulnerable. Backers of the lat-
est reopening plan believe the potential benefits outweigh the risks.

“This is a fine line that we’re walking in the county of Los Angeles,” County Supervisor
Janice Hahn said Friday. “We are threading the needle between keeping the public safe and
allowing our economy to reopen.”

L.A. County has recorded more than 2,200 coronavirus deaths. More than half of all
COVID-19 fatalities in the state have been in L.A. County, which has been slower to reopen
than areas less hard hit by the outbreak. The total number of confirmed infections in L.A.
County is more than 50,000 — representing almost half of all California cases.

Just hours after the reopenings were announced, the county reported 50 additional coron-
avirus-related deaths Friday, bringing California’s total to more than 4,000. The county
also confirmed an additional 1,824 new cases, bringing the total to 51,562.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200530/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. Green light for a wider opening in L.A.

Dr. Christina Ghaly, director of health services for L.A. County, said that although the
numbers of local cases are flattening, the county may see a new upward curve as more
businesses reopen and chances of transmission increase. But that wouldn’t necessarily
mean that the county would have to backtrack.

Newsom and others acknowledged that while the death toll in L.A. County remains a major
concern, other metrics show it’s safe to reopen the economy more. They point to reduced
hospitalizations, infection rates and increased testing capacity.

Hahn said officials have been working with the county’s Economic Resiliency Task Force,
which includes experts from a variety of sectors, including the restaurant industry, to de-
velop a detailed safety plan for inrestaurant dining. The plan includes diagrams showing
how to separate tables six feet apart and proposes putting physical barriers between tables
where such distancing isn’t possible, Hahn said.

As those plans suggest, things won’t immediately return to business as usual for the newly
reopened establishments.

County public health officials are expected to announce restrictions on operations, includ-
ing a 60% capacity limit for restaurants.

“Many of them will have to find creative ways to do that by utilizing their parking lots and
the streets in front of their restaurants,” Hahn said.

Some communities, including the cities of Los Angeles and Long Beach, are preparing to
close streets to traffic and expedite permit variances so restaurants can put more tables
and chairs outside.

Both restaurants and salons are expected to be required to keep detailed records of cus-
tomers, including contact numbers, so public health officials can quickly follow up with
patrons in the event of an outbreak.

Environmental health inspectors will be out inspecting and providing guidance to newly
reopened establishments, but the businesses are not required to undergo an inspection be-
fore they resume services, Barbara Ferrer, the county health director, said Friday.

“As we enter the weekend and we are out of our homes and visiting many of the reopened
establishments because we’re all really hungering for some return to normalcy, I want to
just note that the new normal that you’re going to see reflected in the businesses ref lects
the fact that COVID-19 is still very active in our communities and there’s a great deal at
stake in the reopening,” she said.

Ferrer added that it continues to be crucial for people to practice physical distancing, wear
a cloth face covering and stay home if they’re feeling sick.

“We do again want to note that the actions we take now are essential to making sure that
people don’t become seriously ill, we don’t overwhelm our hospitals and we save people’s
lives,” she said.

“It’s never been more important for businesses, individuals and institutions to use the
tools that we have available to take care of each other and to continue to slow the spread of
COVID19.”

The state is developing a dashboard for counties to track statewide metrics related to im-
provements and pitfalls as modifications continue.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200530/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. Green light for a wider opening in L.A.

“Tf in fact the state determines that there’s a cause of concern, what they really are doing
is offering technical support,” Ferrer said. The state wouldn’t necessarily inform a county
to rescind its eased restrictions but would instead try to understand what is driving an in-
crease in numbers to properly assist.

Restaurateurs and other business owners expressed relief and some concern about the
move.

“T don’t think we’re going to scramble to open,” said Jon Yao, chef-owner of Kato in West
L.A. “I think our timeline is going to be more in line with how we combat the disease in-
stead of what the city says is OK.”

Some establishments had concerns with the pace of the reopening.

“Personally I think it’s all a disaster,” said Josiah Citrin, chef- owner of Charcoal, Dear
John’s, Citrin and Melisse. “It all went too fast; nothing’s been smartly done.”

Citrin said he plans to reopen Charcoal, his steakhouse in Marina del Rey, on Thursday. But
things will look remarkably different: Instead of as many as 110 diners spread across
booths, a communal table and the bar, he’s limiting capacity to 40 diners at a time, all at
their own tables.

He has removed the bottles of steak, chimichurri and barbecue sauce that used to remain
on tables all day. No walk-ins will be allowed. Instead of 56 employees, he’ll have about 35.
The rush to reopen Charcoal, he said, is because the money he received from the federal
PPP loan “is almost out.”

“T followed the rules, and I have almost no money,” he said. “I have a couple weeks left.”
He figures going to a restaurant is safer than shopping at a crowded grocery store and be-
lieves diners will return after being cooped up for so long.

“If cases start spiking and it gets really bad, then maybe people won’t go out,” he said.
“But for now, what else can you do? You can’t go to a movie, you can’t go to a concert, you
can’t go to a sporting game, so restaurants will be in pretty high demand.”

Still, with only 40 diners maximum at a time, he’s bracing for a significant revenue hit.
“It’s going to really hurt my bottom line. From now until this is over, it’s not about making
money, it’s about surviving. It’s about finding ways to see another day.”

Johnny Ciccone, 42, owns Headbetter, a hair salon in Sherman Oaks that had eight chairs,
four worked by employees and four worked by stylists who rented their space. It has been
closed for the past 2 1/2 months.

“We've just been decimated by this,” he said.

Even with the plans for reopening, Ciccone fears that as many as half of the city’s hair sa-
lons are still destined to fail.

“The only reason I’m still able to hang out at my salon is because there has been a morato-
rium on evictions. I did receive PPP [Paycheck Protection Program] funding but that was
six weeks in and I haven’t been able to pay anyone or bring them back to work,” he said.
“For a lot of salons, it’s going to depend on the landlords. Are they willing to make deals?
Maybe my landlord will make a deal with me, maybe not.”

Ciccone was told to close March 15. Pre-pandemic, Headbetter would see 25 to 30 cus-
tomers a day. Ciccone estimates he will be able to serve about half that number under the
new guidelines. Even as he talked about the reopening, workers were removing four of his

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200530/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. Green light for a wider opening in L.A.

eight chairs, in order to comply with the new spacing requirements. Ciccone added that it
wasn’t as if he could just reopen and conduct business as usual — he must provide every-
one with hand sanitizer, screen people for fevers before they enter and require employees
and clients to wear masks.

“One of the biggest changes is that there are not going to be any walk-in services,” he said.
He said he’s purchased thousands of masks and gloves and gallons of disinfectant and
rubbing alcohol, as well as new point-of-sale card readers.

Even signage will require another outlay of money, Ciccone said. “The city has released
sample signs, requiring social distancing, hand washing and other requirements, how we
are going to be operating safely,” he said.

“For a small business like mine, we have spent a few thousand dollars getting ready for the
reopening, changing chair layouts, other things.”

In spite of all this, Ciccone said, “I don’t think we are going to pass this on to our clients,
especially if they have faced unemployment. They are going to have wait longer to get ap-
pointments. These are people I have a close relationship with.”

Anre Anduha, 35, who owns Brotherhood Barbershop in Sherman Oaks, said he’s also
taken on a lot of debt.

“T’m $15,000 in debt now when I consider rent, my $400 to $500 DWP bills, cable bills and
that’s not even counting the lost income,” he said. “When I open back up, I’m only going
to be using four chairs.”

Before COVID-19 struck, Brotherhood Barbershop was always busy with appointments and
walk-ins, averaging between 75 to 100 customers a day. It’s been closed since March 19.
Anduha also faces additional expenses, such as capes, “for every single client that comes
in, instead of many switching capes two or three times in a day.”

Also, by contrast, hair salons do not typically rely on walk-ins for a significant slice of
their business. That’s not the case with barbershops, which do rely on them. Anduha said
that half of his business were people who just walked in, hoping to quickly find an empty
chair and willing to sit around inside the shop to wait, which will not be allowed now.

“It’s supposed to be appointment only now,” said Anduha, who was already thinking
about workarounds, depending on the peace of mind of the particular barber.

In spite of being in debt, he was just as reluctant as Ciccone to raise prices as substantially
as circumstances might warrant, noting that customers have also suffered from issues
such as lost work and income.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200530/page/1/textview 4/4
