2020. 6. 17. Testing lagged as virus raged

Testing lagged as virus raged

‘Massive outbreak’ swept through nursing home where time was of the
essence.

Los Angeles Times - 11 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Jack Dolan and Britiny Mejia

When Budgie Amparo’s mom needed a nursing home, he was in a unique position to help.
As a nurse in charge of quality control for a chain of such facilities, he picked the Norwalk
Skilled Nursing & Wellness Centre, a home with the highest quality rating from Medicare.

 

  

So he was shocked to learn, in mid-May, that the home had a resident with COVID-19 and
that administrators did not begin testing staff — the most likely spreaders of the novel
coronavirus within facilities — until more than a week later. So far, at least 42 residents
and 32 employees have tested positive, Los Angeles County data show. At least six have
died.

The situation underscores how quickly the coronavirus can spread in skilled nursing
homes and how essential early, widespread testing is.

“The lag time was way too long,” Amparo said. “Now they have this massive outbreak.”
Dr. David Silver, CEO of Rockport Healthcare Serv

ices, the company that oversees Norwalk Skilled Nursing and more than 70 other homes in
California, acknowledged that it took “a little more than a week” to test staff after the first
resident turned up positive. Asked if testing sooner would have limited the outbreak, he
said, “I won’t dispute that.”

Since the beginning of the crisis, elderly nursing home residents, who are by far the most
at risk, have suffered a devastating toll. As of Tuesday, COVID-19 had killed more than
2,000 residents and 64 employees of skilled nursing facilities in California.

Despite a recent uptick in cases as the California economy begins to reopen, the virus ap-
pears to be under control in hospitals and other healthcare settings. But nursing homes
like the one in Norwalk, which managed to keep the bug at bay for months, are still suffer-
ing outbreaks.

Most health officials say frequent testing of staff is the best way to protect residents and
slow the spread, but they have struggled to bring it about.

County health officials, recognizing the threat posed by healthcare workers who frequently

work at more than one home and may be infected but asymptomatic, vowed in late April to
https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/202006 11/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Testing lagged as virus raged

test residents and staff at all of the county’s nearly 400 skilled nursing facilities. A month
later, The Times found, they had managed to finish the job at only about a third of them.
As of Sunday, there were still 71 that had not tested everyone. State health officials have
also promised to test everyone at nursing homes, but implementation remains scattershot,
with no clear rules about how the testing plan will work or who will pay.

At the end of May, Norwalk Skilled Nursing, a single-story building occupying about a city
block on Imperial Highway, was among the homes county health officials had not gotten
around to testing yet.

More than half a dozen employees, who spoke with Times reporters on the condition of
anonymity for fear of retaliation, said the facility has suffered from a severe shortage of
personal protective equipment and has allowed nurse aides to move back and forth be-
tween the “dirty” isolation unit meant to contain infected residents and the “clean” unit
meant for those who weren’t sick yet. The home also faced the threat of a mass walkout by
a scared, exhausted staff unless they start getting hazard pay, the employees said.

“It’s chaos,” said a certified nursing assistant. “The patients are getting infected, the em-
ployees are getting infected.”

As the number of infected residents climbed last month, several nursing assistants said
they pleaded with the administration to start testing staff but that their bosses instead
Waited for the health department to provide test kits, which cost an estimated $150 each.
Some employees who had been working with

COVID-19 positive residents said they sought out tests on their own after developing
symptoms, instead of waiting for the county. One of them suffered chills, exhaustion and a
severe headache; the other a fever. Both tests came back positive.

“(All they care about is the money they’ re bringing in here,” said one of the nursing assis-
tants about her bosses. “We fear for our lives, for our families’ lives.”

Silver, the CEO of Rockport, said his company had been in regular contact with both state
and county health officials. When the first positive patient turned up at the Norwalk facil-
ity in mid-May, county officials informed him that, “they were the ones who take care of
testing,” Silver said.

“They couldn’t do it that day, but they would find a day,” Silver said county officials told
him. In the end, it took more than a week for the county to provide the test swabs, Silver
said.

County health officials did not respond to a request for comment on the testing delay.
Elena Houmsi, the nurse in charge of quality assurance at the Norwalk facility, was one of
several employees who confirmed that healthcare workers have been moving back and
forth between the isolation zone with coronavirus infected patients and the rest of the fa-
cility where the uninfected residents remain.

“There are times we are short of staff,”” Houmsi said. “So that’s what they have to do.”
Silver said he had no knowledge of staff moving between the dirty and clean sides of the
building, but acknowledged that would be “against all of our protocols.”

Last week, Rockport suspended the Norwalk facility’s long-serving top administrator as
well as Houmsi.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/202006 11/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Testing lagged as virus raged

Those suspensions were handed down because the two failed to execute a transfer of about
20 patients with COVID-19 to another Rockport facility, Houmsi said in an interview.
Rockport wanted the patients transferred so they wouldn’t have to pay Norwalk nurses
extra to care for the infected residents, Houmsi said.

Silver denied that the transfers were proposed to save money. The idea was to send the pa-
tients to another Rockport home that has been designated by the county as a COVID-19
positive facility, where they would get, “the highest level of care,” he said.

Those transfers have been put on hold, Silver said.

The Times reported last month that experts raised questions when L.A. County designated
another Rockport home, Country Villa South, as its first COVID-19 positive facility. The
idea was to create a landing place for patients leaving hospitals with COVID-19 who had
nowhere else to go. Infected residents from other facilities that were trying to limit the
spread could also be sent there.

But Country Villa South has the lowest possible Medicare quality rating and a history of
failing to follow infection control regulations. Critics, including the former

CEO of Rockport, wondered if the company was motivated by the fact that it can charge
Medicare nearly four times as much for a COVID-19 patient as it can for a typical resident
whose bills are paid by Medi-Cal, the state insurance system for the poor.

Silver denied that the higher reimbursement rate was the motive for seeking the COVID-19
positive designation.

Since then, the county has designated 21 COVIDpositive facilities, including several others
managed by Rockport.

Amparo, who worked for Rockport when he put his mother in the Norwalk facility a few
years ago, now works for another nursing home chain. But he left his 90-year old mom
where she was because it had become her home.

When he discovered what he considered a delay in testing, he said, he reported it to county
health officials. He is not sure if they followed up, he said, but he’s more concerned about
the failure of Rockport.

“Where is the management company that is supposed to be providing services to a build-
ing in crisis, where are they?” he asked.

After filing his complaint, his next move was to pull his mother out of the home. She has
tested positive but is doing well, he said.

Other families weren’t as fortunate.

Last month, Roma Rathell got a call from facility staff that her 87-year-old mother, An-
gelina Pascual, had been exposed to the virus after using a bathroom that a COVID positive
patient had used. Soon after, Pascual, who had lived in the facility for about four years,
tested positive.

“T was hoping that she just needed to be quarantined for 14 days and she’ll be OK,” Rathell
said. But after Pascual ran a fever, she was taken to a hospital, where her condition soon
deteriorated. Pascual died on May 26. Silver declined to comment on her case.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/202006 11/page/1/textview 3/3
