2020. 6. 17. Tribute to victims of police brutality

Tribute to victims of police brutality

At Silver Lake Reservoir, woven tributes honor black victims of police bru-
tality

Los Angeles Times - 9 Jun 2020 - A‘

An art installation at the Silver Lake Reservoir honors black victims.

fe SS

 

   
 

BY DEBORAH VANKIN >>> A chain-link fence circling the Silver Lake Reservoir is the can-
vas for a new art installation protesting police brutality, with colorful fabric woven into the
fence spelling out the names of unarmed black people who have been killed across America
at the hands of police.

“Charles Goodridge” — who was 53 when shot by an off-duty police officer in Houston in
2014 — is rendered in soft cotton sheets specked with navy dots, the O’s filled in with pink
tulle. It rippled in the wind on Saturday afternoon as the project was nearing completion.
“Corey L. Tanner” — 24 and shot f ive times in 2014 in Espanola, Fla., by an off icer who
mistook Tanner’s bottle of cologne for a gun — is drawn with torn, floral cloth that hung
loosely over the swaying, dried grass. “Euree L. Martin” — who died at 58 of a taserin-
duced heart attack in 2017 while walking in Milledgeville, Ga. — is woven partly with
sparkly blue material that shimmered against a sky of the same color. “Say Their Names:
Silver Lake Memorial” honors more than 100 individuals. “And if the reservoir was 10
times as big, we would still have an abundance of names left over,” said project co-orga-
nizer Eli Caplan. “We may hear about the George Floyds, the Breonna Taylors. But for each
of those, there are hundreds and hundreds of other names that get lost. This is a way to ac-
knowledge them.” Caplan,

who identifies as Jewish Puerto Rican, said organizers chose the reservoir location because
of its high visibility in the city. Of about 150 mostly local participants, he said, “the vast

majority were privileged white people, that was the reality. It’s so important to bring the
https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200609/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Tribute to victims of police brutality

names of black people into a predominantly white space. But this isn’t a Silver Lake prob-
lem. It’s a U.S. problem, it’s an everywhere problem.” Close up, the ragged, flowing or
tightly rolled fabric — classic plaid, sheer chiffon, stained pink organza, screaming-or-
ange rayon, vintage corduroy curtains, silky scarves — have an abstract feel, a collage of
contrasting textures shot through with rustic knots and fraying edges, textilestitched
hearts and fresh flowers. From afar, the names of the deceased, many several feet high and
each spaced 10 feet apart, cast bold, inky shadows onto the dirt hillside, a 2.2-mile
memorial loop around the reservoir. Caplan’s mother, Lia Brody, and his friend, Micah
Woods, came up with the list of names to be memorialized. Six to eight hours of online re-
search by each of them netted about 250 names, said Woods, who is African American.
“Sadly, there’s just so much information about this online,” he said. “But so little has been
done to address it.”

They used the Guardian archive “The Counted” — which lists individuals killed by police
in the U.S. in 2015 and 2016 — as their primary resource as well as the site mappingpolice-
violence.org.

“We chose unarmed black Americans and sifted through each case,” Woods said. “99% of
the time they were wrongly shot, the wrong person. Some were shot 18 times. How can you
justify that?” Caplan, Woods and Brody sent out texts, Instagram notices and an email
calling for project participants last week. They instructed people to meet at Silver Lake’s
Neighborhood Nursery School between noon and sundown Friday, and to bring brightly
colored fabric, scissors, water and sunscreen. They advised participants to wear masks and
keep social distance while working.

Caplan’s brother, Simon, marked up the fence on Friday morning, dividing it into equally
spaced -out blocks. Organizers dispersed the victims’ names, along with a sentence or two
about how each person died, to participants.

Caplan said they didn’t include back stories on the fence, but adding laminated bios beside
each name would likely be the next step. “It’s important to recognize that each of these
names is a person with family and friends, who had aspirations. There was a life to them.”
Some participants, however, said they appreciated the project’s minimalism.

“This is just simple and clear and poignant, there’s no confusion,” said Mark Ramos
Nishita, a.k.a. Money Mark from his days as a Beastie Boys collaborator. “The expression is
pure.”

Nishita, who lives nearby in Atwater Village, was filling in a hollowed-out heart with
sheer, ruby red fabric. “It looks like a bleeding heart,” he added.

South Pasadena resident

Stacey Mann, who collaborated with Nishita and friends Kim Davis-Wagner and Seven
McDonald on multiple names in the installation, said the project felt especially accessible
to her.

“I’m a recent single mom — I have two kids — and I have to be very careful about COVID.
So I haven’t been out protesting,” said Mann. “But this felt like something I could do,
something I could participate in at a distance.”

Mann was working with a vintage floral tablecloth from the ’50s that she’d cut up. She said
she takes the title of the artwork seriously. “As people have walked by, we’ve been asking

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200609/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Tribute to victims of police brutality

them: ‘Please say their names, say their names out loud.’ ” McDonald, a producer, writer
and political consultant who contributed wax cloth fabric she brought back from a trip to
Africa, said the victims’ back stories were important to her, so she noted them on her In-
stagram account.

“Unarmed & bi-polar,” she wrote of Tanner. “There were children in the house, Corey had
a 3 month old baby (Flagler County, Florida).”

Reading the stories, McDonald added, “allows me to slow down and feel the infuriating
severity of this ceaseless systemic problem.”

“We only make up 13% of the population,” project participant Charlotte W. Langley said of
black people in the U.S. Looking at the prevalence of African Americans among the victims
of police killings, “it’s undeniable that we have a problem.”

Langley, a TV writer, drew the name “Michael Dean” onto the fence with a crimson red bed
sheet, a peace sign beside it. She hoped the project adds perspective.

“There’s no way not to see all these names when you’re walking,” she said. “And in the big
picture, it’s impossible to move forward in life with your eyes closed, so we’re opening
eyes.” Project organizers will be holding a candlelight vigil for George Floyd at 7:45 p.m.
Sunday at the reservoir. It will start at the intersection of Armstrong Avenue and Lake View
Terrace.

Woods said that when he was researching the police killings, “nine times out of 10 the per-
son’s name wasn’t even mentioned until five paragraphs down.”

“It’s so important,” he said, “that we remember that everyone deserves to live, and de-
serves to be remembered, and have people speak their names: ‘This was Zikarious Flint.
This was Alteria Woods. This was Arthur McAfee Jr.’ ”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200609/page/1/textview 3/3
