2020. 6. 17. Thomas Jefferson was his muse

Thomas Jefferson was his muse

Dan Sisson has spent decades planning and building a replica of Monticello
in the middle of nowhere.

Los Angeles Times - 26 May 2020 - A1 - BY DREX HEIKES

We hold these truths to be selfevident, that all men are created equal.

 

 

Except for Dan Sisson, this 82-year-old guy in the Pacific Northwest. He’s not like us.
Sisson has spent more than three decades planning and building a replica of Monticello,
Thomas Jefferson’s iconic home, in an isolated timberland in eastern Washington. He for-
aged to find cheap materials before digging the foundation with shovel and pickax at age
61. And he hasn’t stopped since.

Sisson is a historian and author, Army veteran, retired professor and former national
magazine columnist. Like Jefferson, he designed and built his home without formal
schooling in architecture or construction.

Because he couldn’t afford to have the home built for him, Sisson scrounged for free bricks
and cheap timber, flooring and marble. He straightened thousands of used nails. He got
help from his wife and son, friends and others captivated by the idea of creating a Monti-
cello northwest of Spokane.

To meet costs, he taught a double load of classes at Eastern Washington University until a
cancer diagnosis nudged him into retirement three years ago.

Sisson has slowed since. But he keeps working. He’s writing a fifth book, about what he
sees as the destruction of democracy and American institutions, and he’s still scavenging
for the neoclassical dream house he’s erecting, brick by pillar by 22,186 used bricks.

June mornings in eastern Washington can seem scripted by God, as was a day Sisson re-
calls from 2001. Brilliant sunshine flooded the building site as he reached a joyous mile-
stone. He had begun putting up walls.

Looking west, he could see across Chamokane Creek, over the treetops of

the Spokane Indian Reservation and it seemed clear on to forever.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200526/page/1/textview 115
2020. 6. 17. Thomas Jefferson was his muse

Sisson knew nothing about framing walls, so he hired a carpenter, who came to work that
day after a row with his wife. Upset and distracted, the man climbed halfway up a 12-foot
stepladder, lost his balance and fell shoulderbreaking, head-smacking first onto the deck.
His eyes rolled back in their sockets.

Sisson’s wife, Karen Meyer, rushed the man to a hospital nearly an hour away. Sisson
stayed behind, putting away tools, worrying about the worker and the house.

The carpenter, who later recovered, had been a perfect fit. Taken by the idea of a new Mon-
ticello, he agreed to help frame the walls for the small wage Sisson could afford. Now
what? As Sisson fretted, he heard a car approaching on his one-lane dirt road. A blue Pon-
tiac convertible pulled up. From the driver’s seat unfolded a physical specimen.

“He looked like a Viking,” Sisson says of the man’s long blond hair, muscular shoulders
and narrow waist.

Dennis Little, from nearby Nine Mile Falls, said a friend told him days earlier that Sisson
needed help.

Little, now 66, recalls that he arrived to find Sisson entirely lost. “I thought he was crazy,”
Little says. “He didn’t have the money to work with.”

But he says he took an instant liking to Sisson and his outsized dream.

“You ever framed a house?” Sisson asked.

I stopped counting at 2,000, Little replied. “I can pay $12 an hour.” I haven’t gotten that
for 30 years, Little responded.

But the next morning, taken by Sisson’s vision, the Viking of Nine Mile Falls began work-
ing for $12 an hour.

Was it divine intervention that put Little at the site, unannounced, less than an hour after
the accident? From the beginning of Monticello West, Meyer says, “every time we needed
something, it showed up.” She calls it synchronicity.

People who have helped with the mansion suggest another reason. The secret sauce isn’t
serendipity as much as Sisson’s mixture of need, architectural ignorance and passion —
which he conveys with a dollop of Southern military charm.

Sisson is perpetually short of the two things that would stop an entirely sane person:
money and construction know-how. But instead of hiding those flaws, he bares them —
then swallows you in his world. He has never climbed a mountain, but wouldn’t Everest be
a hoot?

The two men framed the house in seven weeks.

Sisson is a complex man. He’s romantic, anti-authoritarian, genial, stubborn. His soul,
however, is found as easily as pulling a nickel from your pocket.

He grew up in northern Virginia and remembers his father, a U.S. Army cartographer, tak-
ing him to Monticello as a boy. “Son, if you’re ever going to build a house, you should build
one like this one,” his father said.

Sisson graduated in 1955 from St. John’s College military prep school in Washington, D.C.,
and went straight into the Army for three years. The decades that followed were a hodge-
podge.

He dabbled in college football at Long Beach State, earned a PhD in history from Claremont
Graduate University in Pomona, became a researcher at a liberal think tank in Santa Bar-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200526/page/1/textview 2/5
2020. 6. 17. Thomas Jefferson was his muse

bara and ran as a Democrat for Congress, losing in a 1976 general election. He became an
Alaska newspaperman, a columnist for Field & Stream magazine and a U.S. government
contractor in Oregon. He taught at 12 colleges across the West. He married, divorced, mar-
ried, divorced and married.

It’s a life seemingly in search of a through line. That’s where the nickel comes in: Jefferson
on one side, Monticello on the other.

Sisson’s first book, “The American Revolution of 1800,” published in 1974, argues that
Jefferson’s election as the third president put the nation on a truly democratic course, al-
tering a national impulse for elitism and centralized power evident under the first two
presidents.

Sisson says he understands history’s changing views of Jefferson, especially his embrace
of slavery and the keeping of a slave mistress until his death. He was “a flawed human, like
many of us.” “But his Declaration of Independence gave birth to America,” Sisson says,
and that’s what he wants Monticello West to celebrate.

During a dinner at the house, his mood flattens at mention of national affairs. In his view,
a slow-moving right-wing coup began three decades ago and has accelerated under Presi-
dent

Trump. One institution after another is failing, he says, including the press.

As candlelight flickers over his silvery mustache and brown and gray hair, Sisson brightens
at mention of his other lifelong passions, hunting and fishing.

The rotunda of Monticello West features mounted bison and elk heads and stuffed ducks,
geese and a pheasant. Leaning by the back door is a double-barreled 16- gauge Western
Arms shotgun.

Sisson conceived Monticello West in the mid-1980s. At the time he was under contract
with the U.S. Forest Service to manage Lava River Cave, a slice of national monument in
central Oregon.

Employees of Pozzi Window Co. from nearby Bend occasionally came to the cave to eat
lunch, and Sisson told them about his dream. They offered to sell him cast-off windows for
$50 apiece. Which ones did he want?

He had no idea. But he knew this was his moment. The moment. To choose windows, he
needed a rough building plan. Either put pencil to paper or end the fantasy.

“T looked at this as a test of my liberal arts education,” he recalls. “Either I can learn to do
this or I’m a goddamned failure.”

Sisson studied images of Monticello and books about architecture — and bought 30 win-
dows of various shapes for $1,500. He had no land, no blueprint, little money and no clue
about the enormity of the undertaking. But he had taken a first step.

Next came 22-foot beams salvaged from old lumber mills being razed in Bend. He paid $5
apiece.

Aman driving a truck full of marble came to see the cave. He worked for a company in
Washington and had just been at a homebuilding show in Bend without making any sales.
Sisson pounced. “Would you sell some?” Within the hour he bought 150 pieces for $100.
And so it went. Oak floors from leftovers, cement blocks, cabinets, molding, wood — Sis-
son was picking music for an orchestra he didn’t know how to conduct.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200526/page/1/textview 3/5
2020. 6. 17. Thomas Jefferson was his muse

For a detailed building plan, Sisson turned to the nonprofit foundation that runs Jeffer-
son’s estate. No luck.

So he visited Monticello three decades ago with a tape measure, pulling it out during a to...
Security guards stepped in. No measurements allowed.

How dare they, he thought as he left. “I’m going to build this thing and to hell with those
people.”

Back home, he read deeply about Andrea Palladio, the 16thcentury Italian architect whose
style influenced Jefferson’s design. He calculated Monticello’s dimensions by reading his-
tory books. He roughed out a floor plan.

Meyer met Sisson when she visited the cave from Spokane in 1991. They began dating.

She found Sisson compelling and kind. She liked everything about him, except for this one
thing. Build a new Monticello? “It seemed grandiose and in some ways was against my val-
ues,” recalls Meyer, a retired violinist for the Spokane Symphony. She struggled with the
notion of a life consumed by a house.

As they fell in love, Sisson realized that he had to choose: Monticello or Meyer.

He chose his future wife, who was delighted for a time — until she discovered something
else about Sisson. He never truly lets go. He is charming and maddeningly relentless.
“Every time we passed a house with pillars, he’d say, ‘Don’t you love those?’ ”

Meyer reconsidered. “I never loved the idea,” she says. “But I loved Dan.”

The couple bought 25 junkstrewn acres near Ford, Wash., in 1998 for $19,000 and began
serious preparations for a replica mansion nearly as large as Jefferson’s.

They moved into the house in 2002. It was a shell with a roof, scarcely habitable. “My re-
quirement was running water,” Meyer says.

Year after year they lived among heaps of building materials, with perpetual noise and
construction dust. It strained the marriage. They felt overwhelmed at times. “But once you
start something like this, how do you stop?” Sisson says.

Slowly, year by year, the work got done. Life got better.

Today the house is grand, inviting, comfortable — and unfinished. Sisson says it’s about
90% complete.

The exterior is a four-fifths scale replica of Monticello. The interior is very different, with
fewer, but larger, rooms, some with taller ceilings.

Meyer’s Steinway piano sits in an enormous “Big Room” behind the rotunda, between an
open kitchen and a modest dining table. The room’s other half features a large sitting area
and wood-burning stove, all surrounded by unpainted walls topped by a 17-foot ceiling.
Guides to etiquette say dinner guests have a duty to be interesting. At Monticello West, the
obligation is to be thoughtful.

Sisson tests ideas, gathers new ones. He tolerates small talk, enjoys rich stories. But his
passion is national history and politics. Those are Meyer’s as well, plus the arts.

They see Monticello West as a symbol of Jefferson’s brand of liberalism, his belief in “per-
manent, peaceful constitutional revolution” that Sisson says his hero might foment today
to save a foundering ship of state.

It’s possible the couple could have picked a better place to erect their symbol. They chose
the land for its beauty and natural spring water. They didn’t anticipate life in a county that

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200526/page/1/textview 4/5
2020. 6. 17. Thomas Jefferson was his muse

would vote 3 to 1 for Donald Trump in 2016, a place where some locals publicly advocate
violence against liberals.

Sisson and Meyer are deliberately vague about their home’s location, tucked down un-
marked roads, beyond cellphone coverage. But Sisson shrugs off worries about the com-
munity.

“People know I’ve got shotguns and stuffed heads,” Sisson says. “They just assume that
I’m one of them.

“A lot of my neighbors don’t even know who Thomas Jefferson was.”

If they did, they might know that Jefferson never finished working on the two great pas-
sions of his life. His new country required constant tending, and after half a century of de-
votion to Monticello, the estate remained unfinished at his death.

Sisson accepts that he will never finish his Monticello. His cancer medicine makes him
tired and he’s spending long hours on his book in hopes it can help American democracy.
Lately, he’s begun taking measure. He hung a homemade sign in the Big Room last sum-
mer bearing a quote from a philosopher friend at Eastern Washington.

“The way you look at things can make up for the way things are.”

Maybe they should put that on the nickel.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200526/page/1/textview 5/5
