2020. 6. 17. Georgia election meltdown bodes ill for November

Georgia election meltdown bodes ill for November

Fight over election security, voting rights may come to a head in several
states this fall.

Los Angeles Times - 11 Jun 2020 - A1 - Associated press

Parties trade blame for extreme lines plus machine and ballot issues that threaten to crop
up in several states this fall.

   

head in Georgia, where a messy primary and partisan finger-pointing offered an unset-
tling preview of November’s contest, when battleground states could face a record turnout.
Many Democrats blamed Georgia’s Republican secretary of state for hours-long lines, vot-
ing machine malfunctions, provisional ballot shortages and absentee ballots failing to ar-
rive in time for Tuesday’s elections. Georgia Republicans deflected responsibility to metro
Atlanta’s heavily minority and Democratic-controlled counties.

It raised the specter of a worst-case November scenario: a decisive state, such as Florida
and its “hanging chads” and “butterfly ballots” in 2000, remaining in dispute long after
polls close.

Tuesday’s breakdown drew the second round of stinging criticism for Georgia election of-
ficials since 2018, when the state’s closely watched gubernatorial election was marred by
hourslong waits at some polling sites, security breaches that exposed voter information,
and accusations that strict ID requirements and registration errors suppressed turnout.
That led to lawsuits and changes to state law that included the $120-million switch to a
new election system.

Much of the outcry over the 2018 election targeted Republican Gov. Brian Kemp, who was
still serving as secretary of state when he ran for governor two years ago. Kemp has so far
stayed silent on the most recent problems.

Like two years ago, activists say voting problems seemed to disproportionately affect areas
with large numbers of minority voters in cities such as Atlanta and Savannah.

‘‘We saw those overwhelming issues in Black and brown communities predominantly,”
Aklima Khondoker, state director of the advocacy group All Voting Is Local, told reporters.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/202006 11/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Georgia election meltdown bodes ill for November

Votes were still being counted Wednesday, including absentee ballots that topped 1 million
— the result of many voters trying to avoid trips to the polls because of the coronavirus
pandemic. The possibility of an August runoff loomed in a high-profile primary race
among Democrats seeking to challenge GOP Sen. David Perdue, meaning Georgia voters
could face another logjam at the polls in just two months.

Metro Atlanta appeared to have the worst voting delays, with some voters reporting five-
hour waits and and others giving up and leaving in frustration when confronted with long,
slowmoving lines. Voting hours were extended, and the last voters didn’t cast their ballots
until around midnight.

Adia Josephson, a 38year-old Black voter in the Brookhaven area just outside Atlanta,
waited over two hours to vote but wasn’t about to let the lines stop her. Problems with vot-
ing machines and long lines must be corrected before the next election, she said.

“There’s no room for error,” she said. “There’s a lot to gain and a lot to lose.”

President Trump’s senior campaign counsel Justin Clark blamed Georgia’s vote-by-mail
push amid the COVID-19 pandemic, and alluded to the president’s unfounded claims that
absentee voting yields widespread fraud.

Rachana Desai Martin, a Joe Biden campaign attorney, called the scenes in Georgia a
“threat” to democracy.

Martin stopped short of assigning blame, but two Georgia Democrats on Biden’s list of po-
tential running mates pointed at Republican Secretary of State Brad Raffensperger, who
led the selection of Georgia’s new voting machine system and invited every active voter to
request an absentee ballot.

Atlanta Mayor Keisha Lance Bottoms tweeted at Raffensperger about problems in pockets
of metro Atlanta. “Is this happening across the county or just on the south end?” the
Democrat asked, referring to an area with a heavily Black population.

Stacey Abrams, the 2018 Democratic nominee for governor and an Atlanta resident, said,
“The blame rests solely and squarely on the shoulders of the secretary of state.”

Abrams established herself as a voting rights advocate after she refused to concede her
2018 race to Kemp because of voting irregularities.

“Georgia has seen this before,” Abrams told “CBS This Morning” on Wednesday. “Yester-
day was the most egregious example.”

Voting rights groups, including Abrams’ Fair Fight Action, said Georgia’s experiences jus-
tified their efforts to combat what they described as a coordinated GOP push to restrict
ballot access. Fair Fight, Priorities USA and American Bridge this week announced a “Voter
Suppression Watch” partnership.

“Trump is already trying to extend this culture war by creating fear around voteby-mail,”
said Aneesa McMillan of the Priorities political action committee. She noted the Republi-
can National Committee’s plans to recruit thousands of poll watchers now that the GOP
was no longer under a court order banning the practice, which Democrats equate to voter
intimidation.

“We have to learn our lessons, not just from Georgia, and protect the entire process,”
McMillan said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/202006 11/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Georgia election meltdown bodes ill for November

Georgia was one of nine states freed from federal oversight of their election laws when a
divided Supreme Court in 2013 struck down a key part of the Voting Rights Act of 1965.

In an interview with the Associated Press, Raffensperger laid blame elsewhere, on “one or
two counties,” saying state law charges counties with onthe-ground operation of elec-
tions. “It has nothing to do with what we’re doing in the rest of Georgia,” he said.
Raffensperger minimized problems that were documented in other counties and promised
investigations of the handling of the primary by Fulton and DeKalb counties.

That kind of back-andforth, with white Republicans and Black Democrats from big cities
trading barbs over voting issues, isn’t new. And it could easily be repeated in November in
battleground states where Democrats and minority voters figure prominently in the most
populous cities and counties: Philadelphia; Milwaukee; Broward County, Fla.; the Detroit
area; and Charlotte, N.C.

Fulton County’s elections chief, Richard Barron, called Tuesday a “learning experience”
while alluding to the state’s role in the primary process.

The finger-pointing goes beyond details of the law. Raffensperger correctly noted that
county officials trained poll workers, including on the use of the new voting machines. But
Raffensperger is the state’s chief elections official; he decides how many machines to send
to each county, and his office provides training curriculum for local officials.

On absentee ballots, he pushed unprecedented nofault absentee access, paying to send an
application to every Georgian on the active voter rolls. But no additional money was pro-
vided to hire staff to process the influx, which dwarfed the typical primary.

In the presidential primaries, Biden won, appearing alongside 11 other Democrats on bal-
lots finalized months ago; Trump was the only choice on the Republican ballot.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/202006 11/page/1/textview 3/3
