2020. 6. 17. Floyd’s brother calls for peace at site of his killing

Floyd’s brother calls for peace at site of his killing

Terrence Floyd travels from New York to the site of the killing by police in
Minneapolis.

Los Angeles Times - 2 Jun 2020 - A‘ - By Molly Hennessy-Fiske

Terrence Floyd travels from New York to the street corner in Minneapolis where his sibling
died on Memorial Day at the hands of police.

 

  

 

protest, George Floyd’s younger brother on Monday knelt at the street corner where Floyd
died at the hands of police one week before.

Terrence Floyd arrived from Brooklyn, N.Y., wearing a mask bearing the image of his older
brother and a reference to his last words, a rallying cry for demonstrators against police
brutality across the country: “We can’t breathe.”

Floyd made his way through the crowd of several hundred supporters shortly after noon,
shielded by a security detail wearing “Black Lives Matter” T-shirts. In a scene fitting to the
times, he was flanked by a lawyer who has handled police brutality cases, a pastor and a lo-
cal activist.

Floyd paused first in front of a mural of his brother’s face on the wall of the convenience
store where George Floyd had stopped before police were summoned to investigate
whether he had paid with a counterfeit $20 bill. Flowers and notes of condolences were
piled at the foot of the mural; Floyd asked that no one tread on them.

He bowed his head and wept.

Then he moved to the corner where police handcuffed his brother and held him on the
ground, kneeling on his neck for nearly nine minutes, as captured on the chilling videos
seen around the world.

Floyd knelt. So did the crowd. At first, they chanted George Floyd’s name. Then the street
fell silent. The pastor put his hands on Floyd’s shoulders. He shook his head and cried
some more.

Someone shouted, “We’re here with you, brother!”

After about nine minutes, Floyd rose. The pastor beside him took hold of a protester’s
bullhorn.

“We came in solidarity with those who have been in the streets peacefully protesting,” said
the Rev. Kevin McCall, a civil rights activist from Brooklyn who wore a baseball cap labeled
“Peace.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200602/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Floyd’s brother calls for peace at site of his killing

“We're sending a message to people all over this country: Don’t stop protesting,” he said.
The crowd began to chant, “Lock up all four” — a reference to the four officers who re-
strained George Floyd, 46. All were fired, but only one, Derek Chauvin, 44, was charged
with murder last week.

An autopsy commissioned by the Floyd family found he died by asphyxiation caused by
compression to the back and neck.

“We will not rest until they get locked up,” McCall said.

Terrence Floyd took the bullhorn to condemn the looting and rioting that followed his
brother’s death. He did not want fire and violence to obscure the deeper meaning that
could be realized from his family’s tragedy. He wanted resolution, but one not marred by
fury.

“T’m not over here blowing up stuff,” he said, impassioned. “What are y’all doing? You’re
doing nothing. That’s not going to bring my brother back.”

Someone in the crowd shouted, “That’s not us.”

“Whoever’s doing it — relax,” Floyd said.

He urged the crowd to respond to this latest case of police brutality in a constructive way.
“Educate yourself and know who you vote for. That’s how you’re going to get it. It’s a lot of
us,” he said. “Do this peacefully.” The crowd clapped. “Before I go,” Floyd said, “What’s
his name?”

The crowd chanted it — “George Floyd, George Floyd” — as they have at protests all week.
“Keep my brother’s name ringing,” he said.

Local activist Tommy McBrayer thanked Floyd for coming to his brother’s “gravesite” and
“for blessing us with your strength, your courage and making yourself vulnerable.”

Floyd returned to his car, stopping briefly to admire a circle of flowers, notes and chalk
messages at the intersection. On a nearby fence, someone had spray-painted “Rest in
Power George Floyd.” Before Floyd got inside his car, he raised his fist to onlookers in a
salute for black power.

His brother’s funeral is planned for Thursday in Houston.

“I feel like he got a little closure,” said McBrayer, 30, who grew up in the surrounding his-
torically black neighborhood on the city’s south side.

He and his neighbors have defied the city’s curfew for the last two days to guard the site
from looting and outsiders.

His friend Duwayne Mitchell, 33, said he saw white men in unmarked vans wearing the
Iron Cross insignia associated with white supremacist groups on the city’s north side late
Sunday.

McBrayer and others said they planned to continue to guard the memorial.

“We want to make this corner a historical place,” McBrayer said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200602/page/1/textview 2/2
