2020. 6. 17. Unrest on both sides of border

Unrest on both sides of border

George Floyd’s death spotlights racism and police abuse here.

Los Angeles Times - 7 Jun 2020 - A‘ - By Patrick J. McDonnell and Kate Linthicum Cecilia Sanchez in The Times’ Mexico
City bureau contributed to this report.

  

Guadalajara protest against death of man in police custody has parallels.

MEXICO CITY — A group protesting the death of a 30-year-old man in police custody
torched a pair of law enforcement pickups, broke windows and vandalized a government
building, amid waves of police tear gas.

The tumultuous scene Thursday mirrored episodes of violence that accompanied peaceful
protests in U.S. cities in recent days. But in the case of Giovanni L6pez Ramirez, the action
unfolded in the historic center of Guadalajara, Mexico’s second most populous city.

The events followed a social media campaign that likened the fate of Lopez to that of Ge-
orge Floyd, whose death while detained by Minneapolis police has resulted in murder
charges and fueled outrage about racism across the United States.

Photos of the two men side-by-side have circulated on Twitter, along with the phrase:
“Giovanni didn’t die, the police killed him.”

The Mexican incident has even had a pandemicera twist — activists alleged that police ini-
tially arrested Lépez for not wearing a face mask, a version rejected by authorities.

The civil unrest north of the border has transfixed many in Mexico. The media has featured
images of large crowds of protesters and of armored vehicles roaring down U.S. streets.
That turmoil, along with the Lopez case and others here, are prompting reflections on the
role of Mexican police — as well as the country’s relationship to race. “When we finish our
important support of the anti-racist movement in the United States, can we talk about
racism in Mexico?” asked Tenoch Huerta Mejia, the Mexican star of the Netflix series
“Narcos,” in a widely shared video posted online. “Or will it still be taboo?”

While race is often center stage in the United States, discussions of race have largely gone
unspoken here. When discussed at all, the concept of race is often interwoven with issues
of class.

Mexico officially celebrates its mestizaje , or mixed-race heritage, and takes exception to
what many here view as racist treatment of Mexican immigrants in the United States.

“For a long time, Mexico had a view of itself as not being a racist country — to a large de-
gree because of the contrast between Mexico and the United States,” said Claudio Lomnitz,

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200607/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Unrest on both sides of border

a professor of anthropology at Columbia University in New York who has studied the issue.
“But that also contributed to a prolonged denial of racism in Mexico.”

Another recent online post, by well-known social media influencer Juanpa Zurita, drew
widespread ridicule after Zurita said he didn’t understand the racism fueling the U.S.
protests.

“In Mexico we don’t experience that kind of thing,” he said.

Detractors immediately pounced on what many called a blind spot in Mexican society.
“This is what privilege looks like,” wrote cultural critic Fernando Bustos Gorozpe on Twit-
ter, responding to Zurita’s comments. “Someone tell him about all the racism and clas-
sism that exists in this country that apparently he doesn’t see.”

More than a decade ago, then-President Vicente Fox caused a furor in the United States
when he declared that Mexican immigrants “are doing the jobs that not even blacks want
to do.” The comments were mostly shrugged off in Mexico, where many viewed them as
accurate, if inelegantly expressed.

Mexico is home to a small black community, mostly descendants of slaves brought by
Spanish conquistadors. Mexico’s second president, Vicente Guerrero — said to be of par-
tial African

heritage — outlawed slavery in 1829, a step that has long been a point of pride in Mexico,
compared favorably to belated abolition in the United States.

There was no civil war fought in Mexico linked to slavery, no Jim Crow or U.S.style civil
rights movement. The Mexican Revolution was one of the signature conflicts of the 20th
century — but class, empowerment of landless peasants and resistance to dictatorship
were at its core, not race.

Still, Mexico has a long history of racial inequality.

Light-skinned descendants of Europeans have historically held disproportionate sway in
Mexican politics, industry, academia, entertainment and other fields. Indigenous Mexi-
cans, about 10% of the population, are more likely to live in poverty than mestizos, who
make up the majority of Mexico’s population.

In recent years, there have been growing calls for more cultural representation of indige-
nous and darker-skinned people in Mexican film and television, which tend to highlight
light-skinned actors.

In Mexico, police have long had a reputation of corruption and extrajudicial violence. Sur-
veys show police are among the least trusted of government employees.

The fact that police frequently worked for criminal gangs prompted then-Mexican Presi-
dent Felipe Calderén to send soldiers and marines into the streets to battle drug traffickers
in 2006, the opening salvo in the nation’s failed, nearly 15year-long war on drugs.

A parallel police reform effort pushed by Calderén with aid from Washington also largely
flopped. None of his successors has put much emphasis on rooting out corrupt officers,
boosting police salaries or improving training.

Huge annual demonstrations honoring the tens of thousands of Mexicans who have been
forcibly disappeared often denounce the role of police as gang accomplices.

In Mexico City in recent days, hundreds have gathered outside the heavily barricaded U.S.
Embassy. U.S. Ambassador Christopher Landau publicly thanked Mexican police for inter-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200607/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Unrest on both sides of border

vening on Friday “when a gang of violent anarchists attacked our diplomatic mission with
Molotov cocktails and rocks.”

Some demonstrators proceeded to smash storefront windows along the elegant Paseo de la
Reforma and on nearby streets, spray-painting walls with slogans denouncing police and
racism.

In Guadalajara on Thursday, about 150 protesters demanding “Justice for Giovanni!” fo-
cused national attention on the incendiary case of L6pez, an unemployed construction
worker who died last month after being arrested in the Guadalajara suburb of Ixtlahuacan
de los Membrillos. Protests and media accounts have not focused in the least on his her-
itage — he was mestizo like most Mexicans;

but the U.S. protests over the killing of a black man have nonetheless helped fan indigna-
tion.

In a statement, the attorney general for Jalisco state, which includes Guadalajara, said that
police arrested Lopez on May 4 “for presumed violent conduct.” Grainy cellphone video of
police confronting L6pez and forcing him into a cruiser has circulated on social media.
According to local reports, L6pez’s brother, Christian, said he witnessed police beating his
sibling at the scene of the arrest. When an aunt went to the police station the next morning
to inquire about L6pez’s fate, she was told he had been sent to a hospital in Guadalajara.
That’s where he was declared dead on May 5.

A death certificate published by local media declared “traumatic brain injury” as the cause.
Lopez had also been shot in the left leg, his brother said.

Three police officers have been arrested in the case, authorities say.

On Thursday, police who initially held off from confronting the angry crowd in Guadalajara
finally moved in as protesters smashed windows, spray-painted walls and attempted to
break down and set ablaze the wooden doors of the colonial-era government complex.
Video showed a man dousing a motorcycle cop’s back with a flammable liquid and igniting
it. Colleagues extinguished the flames as enraged cops manhandled protesters.

In all, authorities say, 28 people were arrested and half a dozen officers were injured.

All were subsequently released, and Jalisco Gov. Enrique Alfaro apologized for police at-
tacks on protesters during a follow-up demonstration on Friday.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200607/page/1/textview 3/3
