2020. 6. 17. How to address COVID-19’s racial inequality

How to address COVID-19’s racial inequality

Here’s what can be done about the virus’ racial inequality.

Los Angeles Times - 8 Jun 2020 - A1 : By Deborah Netburn

The extent of coronavirus cases and deaths among blacks is staggering compared with
whites. Here’s what we can do about the gap.

 

Dr. Georges Benjamin knew that when the novel coronavirus landed on U.S. shores, it was
going to be especially bad for black Americans.

“We see it all the time,” he said. “We’ve not had a new disease enter the community where
this hasn’t happened.”

As the director of the American Public Health Assn. since 2002, Benjamin knew there
would be differences in who became sick and who died — and that they would break down
along racial lines. What he didn’t expect was the size of those differences.

“That it happened wasn’t a surprise,” he said. “It was the scope of it.”

In Los Angeles County, black people are dying of COVID-19 at twice the rate of white peo-
ple, with 26 deaths per 100,000 black residents compared with 13 deaths per 100,000 white
residents.

And across the country, black people have made up 22% of all COVID-19 cases even though
they represent just 12.7% of the population, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Con-
trol and Prevention.

Even before the pandemic, the disparities in health outcomes between black and white
people in the U.S. were staggering.

Black people are 44% more likely to die from a stroke than non-Hispanic whites, twice as
likely to suffer from hypertension and 72% more likely to have diabetes, Benjamin said.
They’re also 20% more likely to have asthma, and if they do, they’re three times more
likely to die as a result.

And there’s more: Black women are 40% more likely to die from breast cancer than white
women, 52% more likely to die of cervical cancer, and three times more likely to die from
complications related to pregnancy. Black men are twice as likely to die from prostate can-
cer than their white peers, Benjamin said.

“There has not been a single year since the founding of the United States when people of
African descent have not been sicker and died younger than white people,” said Dr. Mary

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200608/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. How to address COVID-19’s racial inequality

Bassett, a former health commissioner for New York City and professor at Harvard’s T.H.
Chan School of Public Health.

The reason for this is clear, said Barbara Ferrer, director of the L.A. County Department of
Public Health.

“The root cause of health inequities is racism and discrimination, and how it limits access
to the very opportunities and resources each of us need for optimal health,” she said.

She also blamed the crippling effects of stress and fear that ripple through black commu-
nities every time a black person is shot, beaten or asphyxiated by the police.

“It is the consequence of that fear that we are seeing when we report on instance after in-
stance of inequality in health outcomes,” she said.

So, now that the pandemic has laid them bare, what can be done about it? And specifically,
how do we stop COVID-19, a disease that biologically should pose an equal risk to every-
one, from disproportionately killing black people?

There are no easy answers, but that doesn’t mean we are helpless.

Health experts from around the country said there are concrete steps we can take to create
better outcomes for all Americans in this pandemic and beyond.

Here are some of their thoughts.

Name the issue: Structural racism

“The immediate first step is reckoning with the legacy of racism in our country,” said Dr.
Aletha Maybank, chief health equity officer of the American Medical Assn. “If we don’t do
that, then we don’t get at the root causes of why these inequities show up in the first
place.”

The coronavirus has stripped away the veil around all kinds of disparities in this country,
not just those related to health, she said.

“The folks who have gotten sick in black and brown communities are more likely to live in
overcrowded housing, and be relegated to jobs that are considered ‘essential work,’ ” such
as driving buses and stocking grocery stores, she said. “This is not brought on by choice,
but what they have been forced into due to policies around education, housing and eco-
nomics that have excluded communities of color.”

The prison system has also been a big driver of the virus’ spread, and that’s another place
where black people are vastly overrepresented.

We can’t dismantle structural racism if we don’t name it, she said: “People need to under-
stand what it is, and how it shows up in their jobs and inside themselves.”

Give better protections to essential workers and others

There are two parts of getting a disease and dying from it, Bassett said. The first is related
to exposure, and the second is the risk of dying once you get it.

Black Americans have higher rates of many diseases known to raise a person’s risk of dy-
ing from COVID-19, including asthma, hypertension, diabetes and obesity. There are
structural reasons for that, and it could take years to address them, she said.

But in the shorter term, we can do a better job of keeping people — including those deliv-
ering goods, stocking warehouses, staffing grocery stores and working in meatpacking
plants — from being exposed to the virus in the first place.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200608/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. How to address COVID-19’s racial inequality

That means ensuring that all essential workers have access to masks and hand-washing
stations, and that they can stay away from other people.

“Tf we could cut down on the likelihood of people getting exposed to COVID, then we
wouldn’t have to worry so much about their risk of dying from it,” Bassett said.
Acknowledge that not everyone is affected equally

An idea often repeated in policy circles is that a rising tide lifts all boats, said Reginald
Tucker-Seeley, who studies health disparities at USC’s school of gerontology. The idea is
that a collective response to a pandemic — such as implementing stay-at-home orders or
making testing available to all — should help protect everybody equally from the disease.
But that assumes we all have jobs that allow us to work from home, and that we all have
the time and the ability to get to a testing site.

We are not all on the same ship, Tucker-Seeley said. Some people are riding out the pan-
demic in yachts, while others are struggling to stay afloat on perilous rafts. As a result,
when interventions are introduced, we’re not equally situated to benefit from that “rising
tide.”

“If your ship is OK, then you need to be advocating for those on other ships that are not as
well equipped,” he said.

That can be as simple as wearing a mask, abiding by social distancing recommendations
even if your own personal risk of dying from the disease is low, or staying home to protect
your neighbors who may be more at risk than you are.

It could also mean voting for or donating to candidates who say eliminating health dispar-
ities across racial and ethnic groups is a top priority.

“We are all in this together, and as individuals it should be our responsibility to protect
those folks who don’t have the same resources to weather this storm,” he said.

Make testing accessible for all

From the earliest days of the pandemic, there were inequities around who was getting
tested for the virus and who wasn’t, Benjamin said.

“The mantra was, ‘If you have symptoms go get tested,’ ” he said. “But there was un-
equalness in the ability to get tested.”

Many testing sites are drive-through sites, which means you need to have a car to get
checked. And if there are no sites in your neighborhood, you might have to take two buses
and walk two blocks to get a test. A person who is feeling sick would probably choose to
stay home instead.

Early on, some people got the test by calling up their primary care provider. Others didn’t
have a primary care provider — and when they went to a hospital emergency room to get a
test, they were turned away.

Benjamin would like to see testing sites placed closer to bus lines and train stations, and
for tests to be offered at off hours so people don’t have to take time off work to get
checked. Mobile test sites could roll into communities that are known to be most at risk,
such as those that are crowded or have higher percentages of essential workers, he said.
There also needs to be robust contact tracing so that anyone who was in close contact with
an infected person can easily access a test.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200608/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. How to address COVID-19’s racial inequality

If people know they have the virus, they can isolate themselves and keep from passing it
along to others in their community, he said. That’s why equal access to testing is so im-
portant.

Fight for social justice — it helps

There are many societal and structural factors that have contributed to racial disparities in
COVID-19 deaths — address any of them and you will improve outcomes for black and
other marginalized communities, said Tina Sacks, a professor at UC Berkeley’s School of
Social Welfare who studies racial inequalities in health.

Fair housing would improve COVID-19 disparities by reducing crowding, she said. So
would universal healthcare and familyfriendly policies to support women who want to
work.

“Our society needs to be reorganized,” Sacks said. “This is a wake-up call.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200608/page/1/textview 4/4
