2020. 6. 17. Minneapolis unrest persists as police officer is charged

Minneapolis unrest persists as police officer is charged

Protests roil U.S. cities over death of George Floyd as a fired cop involved in
his killing faces a murder count.

Los Angeles Times - 30 May 2020 - A1 - By Molly Hennessy-Fiske

MINNEAPOLIS — The death of a black man and a murder charge against a white police of-
ficer on Friday forced the Twin Cities to reckon with a history of discrimination that belies
a progressive reputation shattered by fires, riots and rage that have ignited a nation.

es :

 

   

Former Officer Derek Chauvin, 44, was charged after a bystander’s video sparked three
days of protests and looting that culminated in the destruction of a nearby police station
Thursday night. Chauvin and three other officers involved in restraining George Floyd have
been fired, but the others have yet to be charged, a prospect for many that has left justice
unresolved.

As buildings smoldered and looting continued late Friday — and as both the country and
this city confronted yet another flashpoint over race and policing — it was unclear if cur-
fews, the deployment of the National Guard and other measures would be enough to stop
the unrest. Across the nation, protests flared, bullhorns blared and police helicopters omi-
nously circled city skies.

A police car was torched in Atlanta, sirens screamed as protesters gathered in

downtown Los Angeles, and demonstrators in Minneapolis waited for nightfall. It was all
brought about by another disturbing video that had gone viral at a time America was con-
fronting the coronavirus and political divisions that again exposed deeper inequalities.
Speaking for the first time about the protests at the White House late Friday, President
Trump said, “We can’t allow a situation like happened in Minneapolis to descend further
into lawless anarchy and chaos. It’s very important, I believe, to the family, to everybody,
that the memory of George Floyd be a perfect memory.

“The looters should not be allowed to drown out the voices of so many peaceful protesters.
They hurt so badly what is happening,” he said, alluding to previous comments on Twitter.
The Floyd family’s attorney called Chauvin’s arrest “a welcome but overdue step on the
road to justice.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200530/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Minneapolis unrest persists as police officer is charged

“We fully expect to see the other officers who did nothing to protect the life of George
Floyd to be arrested and charged soon,” attorney Benjamin Crump said.

Michael Freeman, prosecutor for surrounding Hennepin County, said at a Friday briefing
that Chauvin was the first of the officers charged because “we felt it was important to fo-
cus on the most dangerous perpetrator,” and added that the case “has moved with extra-
ordinary speed.”

Freeman said he anticipates the other officers will be prosecuted, but declined to specify
what charges they could face.

It’s uncertain whether Chauvin knew the 6-foot-7inch Floyd, 46, before he restrained him
while responding to a report that Floyd had passed a fake $20 bill at a convenience store
Monday. Both worked security for the last year at a local club, El Nuevo Rodeo, according
to former owner Maya Santamaria. Floyd worked inside while Chauvin coordinated a team
of off-duty police officers securing the outside, Santamaria said. She wasn’t sure if they
ever met.

Santamaria hired Floyd to work part-time and didn’t know him well, but said she worked
with Chauvin for 20 years. The former officer could be relaxed and mellow, but also badge-
heavy, using his authority to unsettle larger men, she said.

“He had to use the power of the badge to intimidate people that in a fair fight would have
been on the winning side,” she said. “He did use his power as a police officer a little more
than I would have liked.”

Chauvin got along with Latino customers, but did not like to work events that drew African
American crowds, according to Santamaria. When he did and there was a fight, he would
spray people with mace and call for police backup, which Santamaria called “overkill.”
When she first saw the video of Chauvin kneeling on Floyd’s neck, Santamaria said she
recognized the officer immediately and started shouting at her cellphone screen, “My God
— get off of him! What are you doing?”

“T never would have thought he was a murderer. I never would have seen him in that light.
I would have thought he would be reasonable,” she said.

She said was glad to see the former officer charged.

“The streets will be safer tonight because of it. We need justice to be served in this country
so we can heal,” she said. “He needs to be made an example out of. That way, maybe cops
will think twice before doing this.”

Those familiar with the police and city’s history were dubious. “I don’t think people are
going to be appeased as far as justice is being done — the problem goes back years,” said
Dave Bicking, a longtime board member at Communities United Against Police Brutality.
“We have some of the worst disparities in the country in education, employment and
criminal justice. They’re known here to people who care,” said Bicking, who served ona
civilian review board for the Minneapolis Police Department years ago, before several re-
cent high-profile officer-involved deaths. “Despite all the happy talk about police and
community relations, nothing has improved.”

Several hundred people who gathered Friday at a makeshift memorial to Floyd at the cor-
ner where he was restrained — while gasping, “I can’t breathe” — were upset that only
one of the former officers had been charged.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200530/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Minneapolis unrest persists as police officer is charged

Before an 8 p.m. curfew was imposed in the Twin Cities and some suburbs, several hundred
protesters stopped traffic on a bridge near downtown Minneapolis, marching onto an in-
terstate. Outside the charred 3rd Precinct police station on the city’s south side, protesters
vowed to defy the curfew until all four officers were charged. There were fears that the 4th
Precinct on the city’s north side also would be targeted; business owners boarded up win-
dows and National Guard troops took positions.

“Those four police officers all need to be charged with murder. I don’t know what this city
is going to do. I don’t know about my people. But I don’t think one police officer in jail is
enough,” said Anjel Carpenter, 55, an African American registered nurse who lives nearby
and described a pattern of racial profiling.

“The police are terrible here,” she said.

She and others in the crowd praised the sympathetic response of the city’s young mayor,
Jacob Frey, and a like-minded City Council that includes two newly elected black transgen-
der members. Some expressed approval for Minneapolis Police Chief Medaria Arradondo, a
Mexican-African American who has attempted to overhaul the department, addressing
racial profiling in arrests and police brutality.

Frey, 38, a civil rights lawyer, campaigned on issues of police reform and racial inequality
when the then-city councilman ran for mayor in 2017. He posted on Facebook, “The man
who killed George Floyd has been charged with murder. This [is] an essential first step on a
much longer road toward justice and healing our city.”

But residents also see the city’s leadership as the new guard, operating against a backdrop
of discrimination in education, employment and housing.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200530/page/1/textview 3/3
