2020. 6. 17. Democrats push bill for major reform of police

Democrats push bill for major reform of police

Legislation would ban chokeholds, no- knock warrants and make it easier to
sue officers for misconduct.

Los Angeles Times - 9 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Sarah D. Wire

WASHINGTON — House Democrats on Monday unveiled a legislative blueprint for re-
forming policing policies, responding to the nationwide protests calling for change after
the death of George Floyd.

| lees

     

The bill, led by Congressional Black Caucus Chairwoman Karen Bass (D-Los Angeles) and
Sen. Kamala Harris (D-Calif.), includes reforms making it easier to sue police officers for
misconduct in civil court and to prosecute them for criminal behavior.

It would also prohibit the use of chokeholds and certain no-knock warrants by police na-
tionwide, and give the Justice Department civil rights division subpoena power to investi-
gate local police departments.

The bill also mandates the use of body cameras, bans the transfer of certain military
equipment to police departments, creates a national database disclosing the names of offi-
cers with a pattern of abuse, and would eliminate the legal shield protecting police from
lawsuits.

“Never again should the world be subjected to witnessing what we saw on the streets in
Minneapolis,” Bass said of Floyd’s death in police custody.

Video showed the white officer, Derek Chauvin, with his knee on Floyd’s neck for nearly
nine minutes as the unarmed black man was handcuffed and pleading that he could not
breathe. The four officers involved in Floyd’s arrest were fired and now face charges in his
death.

In the two weeks since, hundreds of thousands of Americans in all 50 states have protested
and demonstrated demanding change.

Before unveiling the police reform bill at a news conference, House and Senate Democrats
met in the Capitol’s Emancipation Hall for 8 minutes and 46 seconds of silence.
“Empathy and sympathy and words of caring for those who have died and suffered are
necessary. But it is not enough,” Sen. Cory Booker (D-N.J.) said at the news conference.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200609/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Democrats push bill for major reform of police

“We must change laws and systems of accountability. We must pass legislation that makes
our common values and our common ideals real in the law of our land.”

The bill would also make lynching a federal crime,

something that has broad support in both the House and Senate, but was blocked by Sen.
Rand Paul (R-Ky.) last week.

Without significant support from Senate Republicans, who control that chamber, any leg-
islation passed by House Democrats is unlikely to reach President Trump’s desk. Senate
Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) declined to comment on the bill Monday.

Senate Minority Leader Charles E. Schumer (D-N.Y.) said Democrats weren’t going to let
the issue fade away.

“In the Senate, Democrats are going to fight like hell to make this a reality,” Schumer said.
“Now we must collectively, all Americans, raise our voices and call on leader McConnell to
put this reform bill on the floor of the Senate before July to be debated and voted on.”

Bass said the national protests, and the extremely high level of support for them in na-
tional polls, gave Democrats confidence that legislation could pass at this time.

House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy (R-Bakersfield) said he couldn’t comment on the
House proposal because he hasn’t seen it yet, but he identified three possible points of
common ground with Democrats: raising the level of officer training by linking training
standards to federal money; requiring more transparency about misconduct allegations so
police officers can’t escape past problems by moving to another city; and making it easier
to remove bad officers.

“T want to work and see that we get law. This is amoment in time,” McCarthy said.

“This is the moment where we ought to find where we can come together on.”

Not included in the bill is any nod toward the idea of “defunding the police” or reallocating
police budgets toward other social services such as housing and mental health or sub-
stance abuse treatment, which some activists began calling for over the weekend.
Decisions about department funding levels are left at the state and local levels. In Min-
neapolis, where Floyd died, a majority of the City Council announced Sunday their intent to
dismantle the current Minneapolis Police Department in favor of “a vision for commu-
nity-based public safety.”

“T can’t imagine that [kind of funding decision] happening in a federal way,” Bass said,
“but let me just tell you that part of that cry is a desire for there to be significant higher in-
vestment in communities, looking at why police are needed, what happens, what are the
root causes of the problems in communities.”

House Speaker Nancy

Pelosi (D-San Francisco) said there might be legislation in the future focused on “rebal-
ancing” funding to address systemic disparities.

Republicans seized on the “defund the police” messaging Monday.

“LAW & ORDER, NOT DEFUND AND ABOLISH THE POLICE. The Radical Left Democrats
have gone Crazy!” Trump said in a tweet shortly before the news conference.

A few Republican senators facing reelection in November also spoke out.

“Defunding the police is an absurd and radical position, and I’m concerned that my oppo-
nent has been silent while liberals across the country are calling to disband police forces,”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200609/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Democrats push bill for major reform of police

Sen. Joni Ernst (R-Iowa) said in a tweet.

“We must fully fund the police. Defunding police departments will result in more violence,
more chaos, and more injustice. Police brutality has to end — but by ending brutality, not
the police,” Sen. Kelly Loeffler (R-Ga.) said in a tweet.

House Democratic leaders urged their colleagues to stay focused on the broader reform bill
and not let it be overshadowed.

Rep. Lisa Blunt Rochester (D-Del.) dismissed Republicans as the “masters of distraction”
and said Democrats were focused on the broad, systematic reforms included in the bill.
“We are keeping our eyes on the prize,” she said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200609/page/1/textview 3/3
