2020. 6. 17. City relents after mass arrests

City relents after mass arrests

L.A. officials say they won’t seek charges or fines against peaceful
protesters rounded up by the hundreds.

Los Angeles Times - 8 Jun 2020 - A‘ - By Kevin Rector and Richard Winton

Faced with growing criticism over the arrests of hundreds of peaceful demonstrators, top
Los Angeles law enforcement officials said Sunday they will not pursue criminal or finan-
cial penalties against the protesters.

 

       

. at Sa
The decision follows complaints by many of those arrested that they spent hours in plastic
handcuffs on crammed buses without justification, leaving them with injuries and poten-
tially exposing them to the coronavirus. Many of them were taken into custody last week
for violating curfew rules or failing to disperse after the LAPD had declared their protest
unlawful.
A lawsuit filed by the American Civil Liberties Union of Southern California and Black Lives
Matter L.A. claims the curfews illegally suppressed constitutionally protected protests and
violated people’s freedom of movement. The organizations have also decried videos that
show police officers responding with vi
olence against protesters, including swinging batons and firing foam and sponge projec-
tiles.
Those advocates said the city’s new stance does not resolve all the concerns outlined in
their lawsuit. They added that officials shouldn’t waffle on repercussions but rather dis-
miss the charges immediately.
“Given what we have seen this week with respect to how LAPD enforced the curfew — the
many videos and news reports of excessive force and ambush tactics — any move by the
city attorney to force people to defend themselves against curfew charges would be tanta-
mount to sanctioning police repression,” said Adrienna Wong, senior staff attorney at the
ACLU.
Though city officials said those protesters won’t face criminal charges, it remains unclear
how authorities plan to resolve their cases.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200608/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. City relents after mass arrests

City Atty. Mike Feuer said the process will be “nonpunitive” and “outside of the courts,”
and Los Angeles Police Chief Michel Moore said officials are leaning toward leniency for
anyone not suspected of vandalism.

Moore said the process will focus on educating those arrested on the legal rationale for
curfew and dispersal orders, “so that people are more equipped to understand their re-
sponsibilities should they find themselves in a similar situation in the future.”

Moore and Feuer declined to elaborate but said more information would be available Mon-
day.

Police and prosecutors are still pursuing cases against individuals accused of more serious
crimes. Rob Wilcox, a spokesman for Feuer, said the city attorney’s office had received at
least 30 looting cases from police. The Los Angeles Police Department has formed a task
force with other agencies, including the FBI and Santa Monica Police Department, to col-
lect evidence and pursue additional charges as well.

“Ultimately, persons who committed significant crimes such as looting, burglary, robbery,
vandalism, arson, and assault with great bodily injury will be held accountable for their ac-
tions during the past days,” the LAPD said.

Los Angeles Mayor Eric Garcetti ordered a nighttime curfew five nights in a row after
protests in downtown and the Fairfax district were marred by incidents of looting and ar-
son a week ago. At times, the curfews were issued and changed hastily, causing confusion.
Police used the curfews, as well as orders declaring large gatherings unlawful, as justifica-
tion to sweep people off the streets in huge numbers — possibly into the thousands —
amid an allhands-on-deck mobilization effort. Some applauded the crackdown for restor-
ing order, but others lambasted it as a heavy-handed response to legitimate protests over
the death of George Floyd in Minneapolis and other police killings of black people in cities
across the U.S.

Curfews also were used by Los Angeles County and surrounding municipalities, as well as
other major cities experiencing similar unrest and protests across the country. Los Angeles
and San Bernardino counties were also targeted by the ACLU and Black Lives Matter L.A.
lawsuit.

L.A. County Dist. Atty.

Jackie Lacey, whose office would handle curfew violations in parts of the county without
their own local prosecutor’s office, said her office is “not going to pursue” curfew cases
either. She said that she supports the 1st Amendment and that her office has more impor-
tant cases to pursue. Lacey’s opponent in the upcoming race for district attorney, George
Gascon, has called for all such cases to be dismissed.

L.A. County Sheriff Alex Villanueva said his agency made 475 arrests and would forward its
cases to local prosecutors and leave it to them to determine the right course of action.

The lawsuit gave voice to many in the streets who rejected the legitimacy of the curfews
and ended up in socalled flex cuffs for their defiance. Moore said he personally spoke to ar-
restees who rejected outright the notion that police were justified in arresting them for
peacefully protesting.

Many credited the ACLU and Black Lives Matter L.A. lawsuit with bringing an end to the
curfew.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200608/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. City relents after mass arrests

Litigation around mass arrests has shifted the needle before and forced the city to pay out
expensive settlements. Such settlements cost the city nearly $13 million after a May Day
protest in 2007 and $2.45 million after arrests at Occupy L.A. demonstrations in 2011.
Moore said the lifting of the curfew this time around had more to do with the increasingly
peaceful nature of protests in the city, which continued over the weekend without major
incident.

“As soon as we had a quiet night, [and] we saw business burglaries drop and return to
more reasonable levels, there wasn’t a need for that control agent anymore,” Moore said.
Early on, every protester detained for a curfew violation was cuffed and transported toa
processing center, sometimes miles from where the person was arrested. Some spent
hours aboard buses.

Moore said the process served a purpose in removing people from situations that the LAPD
felt had grown unsafe, both for officers and protesters, and allowed the department to re-
store order to the streets.

He said the department kept those arrested out of corrections facilities after hearing con-
cerns from community leaders about curfew violators being exposed to the coronavirus.
On the last two nights of curfew orders, Moore said, police released some violators on the
spot after only a brief detention.

How the LAPD handled curfew violators will be part of a much larger, ongoing review of
the department’s actions, which marks a pivot out of emergency response and into a more
extended phase of reflection, officials said — including assessing whether the police re-
sponse in this historic moment was too much or too little.

“T understand the criticism from both sides. I appreciate it. And I’m committed to us in-
vestigating and determining and bringing forth to those critics on all sides a review of
what occurred,” Moore said. “We've already begun the process of gathering the informa-
tion.”

Critics say curfew enforcement unfairly affected homeless people and individuals who
were coming from and going to work, despite the fact that both groups were supposed to
be exempt from the order.

Amanda Young, 27, of San Pedro said she and a friend were arrested for curfew violations
while peacefully protesting after police surrounded them near L.A. City Hall on Tuesday
night.

“Tt was really kind of weird because they were all screaming ‘Go home!’ but no one would
let you leave,” she said. “How can you give me an order and then not allow me to fulfill
that order?”

Young, who works at the front desk of an animal hospital, said she worries about a hefty
fine, and officials saying such penalties won’t be pursued didn’t immediately make her feel
better.

“T guess I’ll believe it when I see it, because as far as I know, I still have to show up to court
on Nov. 4,” she said.

The LAPD is also winding down other emergency responses and has shifted its strategy to
deal with protests, Moore said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200608/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. City relents after mass arrests

For instance, on Saturday, police tracked 35 different marches and protests in the city, he
said. For the vast majority, police left protesters alone, staging officers a couple of blocks
away in case they were needed, the chief said.

Police had been criticized for staging in huge numbers around previous protests and esca-
lating tensions with protesters. They also have been accused of excessive force, including
in many incidents caught on camera. Several of those incidents are now under review.

Four officers involved in pulling a driver out of a vehicle in Van Nuys after smashing the
driver’s side window have been assigned to administrative duties pending an investiga-
tion, Moore said. He said he was not aware of any other officers having their status
changed because of incidents involving protesters.

Moore said the National Guard was leaving the city Sunday, but about 250 personnel would
remain on standby at a nearby military facility.

The police chief said the LAPD is also beginning to demobilize. About half of the officers on
the force would have their first days off in a week on Monday and Tuesday, and the other
half on Wednesday and Thursday, he said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/los-angeles-times/20200608/page/1/textview 4/4
