2020. 6. 18. Double homicide probe continues

Double homicide probe continues

¢ After a flurry of activity, the investigation into the deaths of two Rome
women quiets down.

Rome News-Tribune - 3 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Jeremy Stewart Jstewart@rn-t.com

No new arrests have been made at this point in the investigation into the slaying of two
Rome half-sisters whose bodies were discovered off the bypass on May 13.

The Georgia Bureau of Investigation continues to search for clues in the deaths of Vanita
Nicole Richardson and Truvenia Clarece Campbell, three weeks after their bodies were
found under a bridge on the outskirts of Rome with bags tied over their heads.

The days immediately following their discovery revealed some details, including the GBI’S
determination that the two were murdered sometime between the evening of May 12 and
the morning of May 13 before being dropped over the side of the Etowah River Bridge on
the East Rome Bypass.

The two were in Richardson’s 1997 gold Toyota Corolla during the evening of May 12, but
according to information released on May 20 the car has not been found.

Investigators have sought the public’s help in tracking the car down. It was last seen with
the license plate RTJ6295 and is believed

to have been in the Metro Atlanta area.

Anyone with any information about the case can contact the GBI tip line at 1-800-597-
TIPS (8477).

Two men remained in the Floyd County Jail Wednesday after their arrests in connection
with the investigation in the previous weeks.

Desmond Lavonta Brown, 28, and Devin Lashawn Watts, 36, are being held without bond
following their arrests as a result of search warrants obtained through leads and tips re-
ceived by the GBI.

Both arrests stem from searches conducted a the Callier Forest Apartments on Dodd
Boulevard on May 18 and 19.

Brown was originally charged with misdemeanor obstruction of law enforcement officers
after he reportedly entered a vehicle after being told not to do so by police and then re-
sisted officers before being restrained.

Released on bond, Brown was then re-arrested in Bartow County on drug charges days
later. He was transferred to the Floyd County Jail and is currently being held without bond
on felony cocaine charges and a probation violation.

Watts is accused of hiding a .380 caliber Glock pistol, which had been reported stolen in
Pickens County.

Warrants stated that Watts, who cannot lawfully possess a firearm because of a previous
felony conviction, hid the pistol in the closet of apartment J-10 in the Callier Forest Apart-
ments. He is being held without bond on charges of theft by receiving stolen property and
possession of a firearm by a convicted felon.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/rome-news-tribune/20200603/page/1/textview 4/1
