2020. 6. 18.  Pentagon-trump clash breaks open over military and protests

¢ Pentagon-trump clash breaks open over military and
protests

Rome News-Tribune - 4 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Zeke Miller and Robert Burns

President Donald Trump’s Pentagon chief shot down his idea of using troops to quell
protests across the United States Wednesday, then reversed course on pulling part of the
82nd Airborne Division off standby in an extraordinary clash between the U.S. military and
its commander in chief.

Both Trump and Defense Secretary Mark Esper also drew stinging, rare public criticism
from Trump’s first defense secretary, Jim Mattis, in the most public pushback of Trump’s
presidency from the men he put at the helm of the world’s most powerful military.

Mattis’ rebuke followed Trump’s threats to use the military to “dominate” the streets
where Americans are demonstrating following the death of George Floyd, a black man who
died when a white police officer pressed his knee into his neck for several minutes. The
president had urged governors to call out the National Guard to contain protests that
turned violent and warned that he could send in active duty military forces if they did not.
Esper angered Trump early Wednesday when he said he opposed using military troops for
law enforcement, seemingly taking the teeth

WASHINGTON —

Part of a large group of protesters gather around the statue of Confederate General Robert
E. Lee on Monument Avenue near downtown in Richmond, Va. Virginia Gov. Ralph
Northam is expected to announce plans Thursday for the removal of an iconic statue of
Confederate Gen. Robert E. Lee from Richmond’s prominent Monument Avenue. out of the
president’s threat to use the Insurrection Act. Esper said the 1807 law should be invoked in
the United States “only in the most urgent and dire of situations.” He added, “We are not
in one of those situations now.”

After his subsequent visit to the White House, the Pentagon abruptly overturned an earlier
decision to send a couple hundred active-duty soldiers home from the Washington, D.C.,
region, a public sign of the growing tensions with the White House amid mounting criti-
cism that the Pentagon was being politicized in response to the protests.

Former Secretary Mattis, a retired Marine general, lambasted both Trump and Esper in an
essay in The Atlantic Wednesday for their consideration of using the active-duty military
in law enforcement — and for the use of the National Guard in clearing out a largely
peaceful protest near the White House on Monday evening.

“We must reject any thinking of our cities as a ‘battlespace’ that our uniformed military is
called upon to ‘dominate,’” Mattis wrote, referencing quotes by Esper and Trump respec-
tively. “Militarizing our response, as we witnessed in Washington, D.C., sets up a conflict
— a false conflict — between the military and civilian society. ”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/rome-news-tribune/20200604/page/1/textview 4/1
