2020. 6. 18. Unity Point project gets fresh look

Unity Point project gets fresh look
¢ Rome is also set to finish up the new Mount Berry Trail.

Rome News-Tribune - 27 May 2020 - A1 - By Doug Walker Dwalker@rn-t.com

Engineers from a consulting firm in Chattanooga walked Unity Point with Rome officials to
get a feel for how best to use the park at the confluence of the Oostanaula and Etowah
rivers.

 

An earmark cof $1, 8 million was included i in the 2013 SPLOST package to restore the closed
and crumbling vantage point. But two initial bids on the project that came in on budget did
not accomplish what city officials had hoped for.

Now CTI Engineers has been contracted to come up with a new design.

City Manager Sammy Rich said one thing he feels confident will be included is some sort of
canoe or kayak put-in on the Etowah River side of the point.

The project is also supposed to provide a means of controlling the erosion of the point. The
river levels fluctuate significantly during the rainy season and erosion at that area occurs
naturally.

Rich said he asked CTI design

engineers to give the city some different options. The company has done a similar project
in East Ridge, a suburb of Chattanooga, where there is a kayak launch at the confluence of
South Chickamauga and West Chickamauga creeks, said Philip Schofield of CTI Engineers.
The city has not given him a deadline for the completion of the design yet, he said.

“The view is incredible,” Rich said. “I want to create something that is inviting and having
as much usable real estate as possible ... It’s one of the more beautiful spots in Rome but it
currently does not reflect that.”

The lower tier of the point is still heavily used for fishing, even though fencing was put up
years ago to try to keep people out of the area for safety’s sake.

“Figuring out a way to preserve that while protecting it environmentally is the challenge of
the design,” Rich said.

As it relates to the stabilization of the riverbank, Schofield said a variety of permits will be
required from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the Georgia Environmental Protection
Division.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/rome-news-tribune/20200527/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. Unity Point project gets fresh look

“Tt’ll be armored but it will be vegetated,” Schofield said. “Hopefully, when it’s done you
won’t even be able to tell the rock armoring is there because of the soil and vegetation.”
This RN-T file photo shows Big Dry Creek, where the new Mount Berry Trail will tempo-
rarily end. It will ultimately be bridged when the second section of the trail is constructed
all the way out to the Armuchee Connector.

Another 2013 SPLOST office on Coligni Way out to project is waiting on some Big Dry Creek.
dry weather. Spriggs Construction won

Construction crews are the bid in December 2018 ready to place a hard surface for
$466,369. down on the two-mile “The trucks are probably stretch of the new Mount going
to have to come in from Berry Trail. The trail exa couple of different points to tends from
behind the post do the surface and we really

the need the weather to dry it out a little bit,” Rich said. “If you think about hauling a full
truck across the Berry pasture roads, we’re going to need some dry weather for that.”
There will be some opportunities to develop vistas of the river along that trail. The city
may bring back a goat crew to help clear vegetation in some areas along the river buffer,
Rich said.

“You do need access to spots where you can have a nice place for a picnic table, rest and
stop,” Rich said. “If you’re a bike rider and want to pull over and be able to look over the
river, I think that’s one of the critical pieces to making a successful trail system.”

The trail would add another picturesque area to Rome’s trail system, he said.

“Anybody who’s seen it has just fallen in love with that area” Rich said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/rome-news-tribune/20200527/page/1/textview 2/2
