2020. 6. 18. Downtown public drinking defeated

Downtown public drinking defeated

¢# Rome’s city commission debates the issue for an hour before voting 5 to 3
against it.

Rome News-Tribune - 9 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Jeremy Stewart Jstewart@rn-t.com

Proposed limits on an ordinance essentially allowing an open-container zone in down-
town Rome were not enough to get it passed by the City Commission on Monday evening.
After hearing from community pastors, business owners, and other residents, and dis-
cussing the issue for about an hour, the board voted 5 to 3 against public consumption of
alcohol downtown.

The ordinance included restrictions such as having the alcohol in a Downtown Develop-
ment Authority-approved plastic cup no bigger than 16 ounces, and ending public con-
sumption at 10 p.m. each day, which was recommended by the DDA at its meeting last
week.

The vote was taken after an amendment to the original proposal that limited the length of
the ordinance to 60 days, a suggestion made by Commissioner Jamie Doss.

Commissioner Wendy Davis made the motion to approve, which was seconded by Com-
missioner Mark Cochran. Commissioners Craig Mcdaniel, Jim Bojo, Sundai Stevenson,
Bonnie Askew, and Randy Quick voted against the motion. Davis, Cochran and Doss voted
for it.

The Alcohol Control Commission had asked the city commission to revisit the ordinance,
which was previously voted down by the board in October 2017. It was to be on a temporary
basis, to help downtown restaurants and bars struggling as a result of having less business
than normal during the COVID-19 pandemic.

The district specified in the ordinance would have included the area of Broad Street from
East Sixth Avenue to East First Avenue, Bridgepoint Plaza, across the Oostanaula River to
West Third Street and down to North Fifth Avenue.

“T get it. The businesses downtown are hurting. The restaurants that serve alcohol are
hurting,” Askew said. “For me to assume that someone who buys a cup of

alcohol from one business and walks around town would increase the business of all of the
businesses downtown, I’m not buying it. It has to be something other than this is going to
save some businesses.”

Among the concerns

brought up by both public speakers and the commissioners was the ability of the Rome Po-
lice Department to enforce the ordinance and maintain the public’s safety while down-
town.

Chief Denise Denise Downer-mckinney said it would be difficult, adding that they are 10
officers short of full employment and would have to move officers from other parts of the
city to regulate it.

The chief also mentioned the comparison some supporters made with the public con-
sumption allowed at downtown block parties during the summer. She said they hire eight

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/rome-news-tribune/20200609/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. Downtown public drinking defeated

to 10 off-duty officers to help with those events because alcohol is allowed.
“So, we don’t have eight to 10 officers to put downtown on a weekly basis,” she said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/rome-news-tribune/20200609/page/1/textview

2/2
