2020. 6. 18. Georgia schools get guidelines to reopen amid COVID-19

Georgia schools get guidelines to reopen amid COVID-19

¢ Screening staff and students daily is among the advisories.

Rome News-Tribune - 2 Jun 2020 - A1 : By Beau Evans Capitol Beat News Service

Georgia school officials released guidelines Monday

on how to reopen the state’s public schools for the 2020-2021 school year amid the coron-
avirus pandemic.

The guideline document, called “Georgia’s Path to Recovery for K-12 Schools,” outlines
steps local schools should take to prevent the highly infectious virus from entering class-
room environments and to curb its spread if an outbreak occurs.

Georgia’s school districts halted in-person classes in more than 2,200 schools starting in
late March as concerns ramped up over coronavirus. The state’s roughly 1.7 million stu-
dents were left to finish the remainder of their springsemester coursework via online
means.

In recent weeks, Gov. Brian Kemp has moved to reopen sectors of the state’s economy and
social activities, including summer

school classes that can be held starting this month. Summer schools would have to keep
students separated in classrooms and routinely sanitize facilities.

The 10-page guideline document released Monday leaves it to school districts whether to
close school buildings in the event the virus spreads. It also calls for districts to participate
in contact tracing with state health officials, place educational signs on good hygiene in
school buildings and decide how to handle students and teachers who show symptoms of
the virus.

Additionally, the guidelines note ways for school districts to shift to online learning in the
event of an outbreak, as well as to take a “hybrid” approach allowing districts to blend in-
person and online learning. If the virus spreads at a “moderate” level, the guidelines ad-
vise schools to screen students and staff before they enter buildings and to require stu-
dents to keep space between each other in cafeterias, classrooms and hallways.

“In partnership with the Georgia Department of Public Health, we created these guidelines
to give school districts a blueprint for safe reopening that is realistic in the K-12 setting,”
State School Superintendent Richard Woods wrote in the document. “We have a responsi-
bility to keep out students, teachers, school

staff and families safe and to provide the best possible education for our children.”

The guidelines will likely not be the last word on how Georgia should resume classes for
the 2020-2021 school year. Last month, Kemp and Woods formed six working groups of
educators, public health officials and state agency representatives to lead the school re-
opening effort.

The guidelines also come as the Georgia Department of Education faces acrossthe-board
cuts of around $1.6 billion to all aspects of the agency prompted by

the virus, from state administrative offices in Atlanta to specialty programs like
agricultural education to everyday basic classroom education.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/rome-news-tribune/20200602/page/1/textview 4/1
