2020. 6. 18. COVID-19 cases rise in Floyd; hospitalizations remain low

COVID-19 cases rise in Floyd; hospitalizations remain low

¢ A drop in hospitalizations likely means many infected people have mild
or no symptoms.

Rome News-Tribune - 27 May 2020 - Ai - By John Bailey Jbailey@m-t.com

Floyd County has seen an increase of more than 50 COVID-19 infections over the past
week, and two deaths, but the number of hospitalizations has remained low.

 

Floyd County COVID-19 cases
Source: Complied reports from focal hospitals and the Georgia Denartment of Public Hest

en

 

 

 

 

“We're watching hospitalizations closely to understand the state of the outbreak because
they’re not as dependent on testing. Even though our local hospitalizations are relatively
low, I don’t want to put too much faith in that welcome bit of good news,” said Dr. Gary
Voccio, health director for the Georgia Department of Public Health Northwest Health Dis-
trict.

“We're not out of the woods yet,” Voccio said. “The virus is still circulating in our commu-
nity and transmitting person to person.”

As of Tuesday at 7 p.m.

Floyd County had 243 cumulative cases of COVID-19. That doesn’t mean active cases, as
the cumulative case rate is not adjusted down after an infection has passed.

However, more telling may be that there have been 56 new cases reported in the past week
and two people have died — one on Tuesday.

In the week prior, from May 12-18, there were 29 new cases and one death reported. In the
week before that, May 5-11, there were seven new cases and one death.

“The increase in confirmed Floyd COVID-19 cases is most likely due to significantly in-
creased testing, and the irregularity of the increase is most likely due to batch reporting of
test results,” Voccio said. “We expected cases to go up when we reopened, and that’s cer-
tainly a contributing factor, too.”

Gov. Brian Kemp declined to extend a statewide shelter in place order on May 1 after enact-
ing the order on April 2.

During that period of time, the number of new local cases each day was relatively low —
but another factor is that public health officials extended free COVID-19 testing to anyone
after the state opened back up.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/rome-news-tribune/20200527/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. COVID-19 cases rise in Floyd; hospitalizations remain low

While the number of those who have tested positive has increased, the number of those re-
quiring hospitalization has dropped in the past few months.

“We believe the recent increase in positive tests is simply a result of the increase in the
number of tests being done,” said Dr. Ken Jones, interim chief medical officer at Floyd
Medical Center. “The good news is that the majority of these positive tests seem to be indi-
viduals who aren’t symptomatic.”

As of Tuesday there were only three people being treated in area hospitals for COVID-19
infections.

“Without a correlating increase in hospitalized COVID-19 positive patients, it is likely that
the increase represents individuals who are asymptomatic or who have mild symptoms
that do not require hospitalization for proper management,” said Redmond Regional
Medical Center ER Medical Director Dr. Dave Tomey.

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is estimating about a third of those who
are infected with COVID-19 do not show any symptoms.

“As we continue to reopen, people should still practice safe physical distancing, wear cloth
masks when close contact with others is unavoidable, and wash their hands frequently and
thoroughly,” Voccio said. “I’m concerned that many people think we’ve been given an all-
clear.”

“T’m concerned that many people think we’ve been given an all-clear.”

Dr. Gary Voccio, district public health director

A key to tracking and potentially slowing or stopping infections is through what is called
contact tracing — essentially trace the contact back to the source of the infection.

Once people are diagnosed with COVID-19 the DPH asks if they’d be willing to help them
find the source of the infection. The initial reaction is positive, but when asked to fill out
forms relating to their prior contacts, participation drops off dramatically, Northwest Ge-
orgia District Public Health spokesman Logan Boss said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/rome-news-tribune/20200527/page/1/textview 2/2
