2020. 6. 18. The Museum of Flight adds a display in Paulding County, shifts some historic planes there.

The Museum of Flight adds a display in Paulding County,
shifts some historic planes there.

¢ The nonprofit shifts some of its historic planes from the Floyd County
airport.

Rome News-Tribune - 5 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Olivia Morley Omorley@rn-t.com

Although a contract for a two-year hangar lease was approved by Floyd County commis-
sioners in February, the Museum of Flight already had a land lease with Paulding County.

 

 

 

According to Paulding County Airport Director Terry Tibbitts, they signed a 40-year land
lease with the museum in January.

Museum Director Christine Lewis said the lease is being used to house some static displays
at the airport in Dallas. Those displays are aircraft that are not intended to fly, but can be
toured or viewed closely.

One of the attack helicopters on display inside the Museum of Flight hangar at Richard B.
Russell Regional Airport in February 2020.

Multiple posts on social media, including the Keep

Paulding Beautiful Facebook page, have said that the museum is moving to Paulding
County. Lewis said nothing official has been posted on the museum’s website or
Facebook page regarding a move. She declined to comment further.

Right now, Lewis said, some of the planes are being featured as part of a backdrop for the
Paulding Chamber of Commerce luncheon at the Paulding Northwest Atlanta Airport.
John Carroll, manager of Floyd County’s Richard B. Russell Regional Airport in Rome, said
the museum hasn’t communicated anything to him about a possible move.

Assistant County Manager Gary Burkhalter said neither he nor the County Commission
were aware of the lease with the Paulding airport.

Before Floyd County presented a new lease to the museum, multiple airports reached out
to the nonprofit with proposals. The Paulding airport proposed a lease in December that
would have provided a 1,500-squarefoot space for the museum to use while the airport
constructed a new hangar to house the aircraft.

The nonprofit museum has been at the Floyd County airport since 2014, after moving from
Hixson, Tennessee.

The museum is currently closed to the public and is accepting tours by appointment only
because of coronavirus concerns.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/rome-news-tribune/20200605/page/1/textview 4/1
