2020. 6. 18. We can do better

We can do better

Rome News-Tribune - 2 Jun 2020 - A1

There are people in our community who go unheard and unheeded.

There are people in this community who are angry and frustrated. They are afraid and they
want change.

Recent events across the country have ignited a spark to which many people have gravi-
tated. And in some places that has led to rioting, looting, destruction of property and vio-
lence.

This is a call for change. It is a cry that has gone unheard for too long.

But in Rome we saw something different. There is still anger and frustration here. There is
still a passionate plea for change here. There is still a stance against injustice. But it was
done in a way that makes us proud to be a part of this community — it was done peacefully
and with an eye toward understanding.

As violent protests spread across the nation, protests also took place on Broad Street. But
those people of all colors, classes and creeds who gathered to show their support for justice
and for change did so with a respect for property and for human life.

We would like to thank those who chose to protest peacefully. We see your anger and your
disappointment. We hear your voice. We echo your calls for change. And we applaud your
restraint and self control.

Our businesses thank you. Our law enforcement thanks you. Our families thank you.

In the end, those who constructively contribute to the social conversation will be remem-
bered and their voice will be heeded.

As we ask for those who protest to do so peacefully we also need to remember the impor-
tance of lifting people out of poverty if we can. We should strive to make sure that educa-
tion programs survive

upcoming budget cuts — programs that are aimed at helping children who have not had
the nurturing or the benefits that many of ours have had.

We need to make sure we’re putting our money toward initiatives that pave the way for
those who’ve not been afforded the assistance many of us have.

We’ve concentrated for far too long on elevating those of us who have already been given a
step ahead in life.

Helping populations of historically disenfranchised groups benefits everyone. Overall this
is a racial issue, but even more so it’s a systemic poverty issue. Laws were on the books in
living memory to keep black people apart from white people and to keep them living in
poverty.

That is a fact.

But if we can help, all of us. If we can move toward helping people — our people — finda
better future for their families, we should. If the American dream is not that, what is it?

If we who have found our way into a better life can’t help others also realize that same
dream, what kind of Americans are we?

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/rome-news-tribune/20200602/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. We can do better

For those of us who are doing well, can you remember a time when you weren’t? Can you
remember the days when you couldn’t pay a bill or were worried about rent being due?
This is a way of life for many of our people, and it’s a stressor that can lead to many bad
decisions. Add to that the fear of imprisonment or death, just because of who you are and
what you look like.

There is no easy fix to the situation in which our country finds itself. And unfortunately
there are too many people who dismiss what they don’t understand or what they don’t
want to understand.

English poet John Donne once famously wrote “Any man’s death diminishes me, because I
am involved in mankind. And therefore never send to know for whom the bell tolls; it tolls
for thee.”

We are one nation and one people. We will rise together or we will fall together.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/rome-news-tribune/20200602/page/1/textview 2/2
