2020. 6. 18. DDA backs outdoor alcohol district

DDA backs outdoor alcohol district
¢ The Rome City Commission will consider the ordinance Monday night.

Rome News-Tribune « 5 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Doug Walker Dwalker@rn-t.com

Rome’s Downtown Development Authority has gone on record in unanimous support of an
ordinance to temporarily allow public consumption of alcohol outdoors in the downtown
district.

The panel did suggest one change, recommending that the cut-off time for outdoor con-
sumption be moved from 11 p.m. to 10 p.m. The ordinance will be considered by the Rome
City Commission on Monday night.

The ordinance is essentially the same one that went before the City Commission in 2017. A
motion to vote on the ordinance did not get a second and died.

The proposed district covers Broad Street, from the South Broad Bridge up to Sixth Avenue,
and across the Oostanaula River to West Third Street between Second and Fifth avenues.
City Clerk Joe Smith said that while the language in the ordinance calls it a temporary
change, there is no specific time frame stated in the document. The Alcohol Control Com-
mission opted to leave that up to the City Commission.

DDA member David Prusakowski suggested that the DDA make some sort of recommenda-
tion — whether 30, 60 or 90 days — to provide a basis for the city to determine if any
problems or abuse issues come up. However, the panel chose not to weigh in on that as-
pect.

DDA member Connie Sams, who co-owns River Dog Outpost at the end of Broad Street,
noted that the recommended 10 p.m. cut-off would coincide with the time most restau-
rants downtown stop serving meals — and the purpose of the ordinance is to help restau-
rants, not bars.

“T think we have to be careful in that we’re trying to push this through based on COVID-19
and the current situation,” said Chairman Bob Blumberg. “Reality is that this is something
we should be discussing in general, not just for this period.”

Blumberg said it is something that other communities across the state have been doing
and that Rome should consider it to remain competitive.

Communities including Dalton, Roswell, Alpharetta and Acworth have similar ordinances
allowing for public consumption outdoors.

City Commissioner Jim Bojo, who is the commission liaison to the DDA, said that he is op-
posed to the ordinance right now but could have a change of mind in the future.

“T think at this point, this

Downtown Development Authority member Bryan Shealy (left) listens as Rome City Com-
missioner Jim Bojo explains that he believes a temporary ordinance allowing outside con-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/rome-news-tribune/20200605/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. DDA backs outdoor alcohol district

sumption of alcohol might hurt downtown more than it would help restaurant owners. is
going to hurt Broad Street more than it helps,” Bojo said.

He said only two people have contacted him in support of the public consumption ordi-
nance but he’s heard from

30 to 40 who are opposed.

DDA Executive Director

Amanda Carter reminded

Bojo and the board that public consumption downtown has been permitted since 2012 for
special events such as the First

Friday concerts and there have not been any major issues.

The City Commission’s Monday meeting will be open to the public via a viewing screen set
up in the City Auditorium.

Anyone who wants to make a comment will be instructed to move over to the Sam King
Room where some commissioners will be located along with a hook-up for the Zoom video
session.

Several speakers have already signed up to address the alcohol issue.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/rome-news-tribune/20200605/page/1/textview 2/2
