2020. 6. 18. DPH urges to remain vigilant against COVID-19

DPH urges to remain vigilant against COVID-19

¢ Many questions remain about the spread of the new coronavirus as the
pandemic continues.

Rome News-Tribune - 12 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Jeremy Stewart Jstewart@rn-t.com

Georgia Department of Public Health officials say there is still a need to stay vigilant
against the new coronavirus, whether it’s at the forefront of our minds or not.

 

Floyd County COVDD- 19 cases
Souren: Compiled reports frase lsoel hompitals aed the Georgia Gesertment of Public Health

 

 

 

e Veetoocknowledged the meceat Seven stalf members who work at “Chey had then saritzation plane in
Current events and time away from phrases like “shelter in place” and “essential busi-
nesses” showing up in news headlines does not mean the threat from COVID-19 is neu-
tralized.

“I think the biggest thing right now is, many of us feel like the virus is gone and disap-
peared. We have to understand there is no on/off switch. It hasn’t disappeared. It’s still
here,” said Logan Boss, Northwest Georgia Public Health District Public spokesman.

The number of total confirmed cases of COVID-19 in Floyd County increased by seven
overnight Wednesday to 356 on Thursday afternoon, according to the DPH — with 88 new
cases since the beginning of June.

There was one new hospitalization reported in Floyd County on Thursday morning, bring-
ing to five the number of COVID-19 patients in local hospitals.

They are all being treated at Redmond Regional Medical Center.

“In our local community, there has not been a significant increase in the numbers admit-
ted for COVID-19, and we have a fairly low hospitalization rate for COVID-19, which isa
good sign. But that’s today. Next week it may be a different story,” said Dr. Gary Voccio,
health director for the Northwest Georgia public health district.

“It is still very early,” he told the Rome City Commission during its regular meeting Mon-
day.

Boss said while there have been

positive trends in the fight against the new coronavirus locally, how the virus will react
and grow is still unknown.

There are theories that, while the initial spike is more or less over, the virus could go dor-
mant over the summer and then return in colder months with a second wave similar to the
1918 Spanish flu and the 2009 swine flu pandemics.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/rome-news-tribune/2020061 2/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. DPH urges to remain vigilant against COVID-19

“The answer, as with so many things with this coronavirus, is we don’t really know,” Boss
said. “We’ve never seen a coronavirus pandemic spread, so a lot of what we are watching is
new, like the virus itself.”

Voccio strongly recommends that people continue practicing the three main tenets of pre-
venting the spread of the virus — social distancing, wearing a mask where social distanc-
ing is difficult, and the strict sanitization of hands and hightouch surfaces at work and
home.

Voccio acknowledged the recent spike in cases at the Floyd County courthouse as an exam-
ple that the virus is still circulating in our area.

Seven staff members who work at the courthouse tested positive for COVID-19, and all ac-
tivity in the building is shut down until June 22.

“They had their sanitization plans in place and were adhering to guidelines but, again, it
still goes to show you what the virus can do,” Voccio said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/rome-news-tribune/2020061 2/page/1/textview 2/2
