2020. 6. 18. Courthouse shut down for 2 weeks after more COVID-19 exposures

Courthouse shut down for 2 weeks after more COVID-19 ex-
posures

¢ Currently, seven courthouse employees have tested positive.

Rome News-Tribune - 9 Jun 2020 - A1 - By John Bailey Jbailey@m-t.com

The Floyd County courthouse will be shut down for the next two weeks after several more
people who work there were exposed to those who tested positive for COVID-19.

An emergency order issued Monday stated that a “significant number of courthouse em-
ployees have tested positive or required treatment.” The Department of Public Health has
determined that many have had close contact with an infected employee.

There are currently seven confirmed cases of COVID-19 among courthouse staff, said
Northwest Georgia District Public Health spokesman Logan Boss

“This requirement has resulted in all of the judges and staff of the probate court being in
self-quarantine,” the order stated. “In addition, the Office of the Clerk of Superior Court
has most, if not all, of its employees in selfquarantine.”

At this point, two judges and their staffs as well as three deputies in the Floyd County
Sheriff’s Office are also in self-quarantine.

Sheriff Tim Burkhalter said there are still no cases of COVID-19 at the jail that they’re
aware of.

The courthouse is slated to reopen Monday, June 22, at 8 a.m. Social distancing will be en-
forced and a mask required for entry.

During the time the courthouse is closed, a presiding judge will be available at the Forum
River Center for temporary protective orders and family violence petitions. Forms for
those petitions can be picked up at the Forum’s front door near the Town Green and tem-
porary hearings will take place at 3 p.m. that same day. The courthouse has only been per-
forming duties deemed essential — such as bond hearings — since a statewide judicial
emergency was declared by Georgia’s high court.

Even when many operations were expected to return to normal, there was a plan to move
some hearings to the Forum. In late April, the county commission passed a resolution
making the large event venue an annex for the Rome Judicial Circuit.

The Magistrate Court will continue to conduct first appearance hearings remotely with the
jail. All other Magistrate Court hearings deemed nonessential by a previous Georgia
Supreme Court order will be postponed.

Floyd County’s Juvenile Court has been handling all matters remotely and will continue
that practice.

A previous order had required all courthouse employees to be tested for COVID-19 on
Monday. However, some new COVID-19 infections may not be immediately detectable with
a test, Boss said.

The CDC recommends the 14-day quarantine period for those who have been exposed to
COVID-19.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/rome-news-tribune/20200609/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. Courthouse shut down for 2 weeks after more COVID-19 exposures

As of 3 p.m. Monday, Floyd County had 326 cumulative COVID-19 cases. There were three
new cases on Monday but have been 58 new cases over the past seven days.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/rome-news-tribune/20200609/page/1/textview

2/2
