2020. 6. 17. 100,000

100,000

The U.S. marks a somber milestone in the coronavirus pandemic as the
death toll reaches

The Washington Post : 28 May 2020 - A1 - BY MARC FISHER

One hundred thousand Americans dead in less than four months. {l It’s as if every person
in Edison, N. J., or Kenosha, Wis., died. It’s half the population of Salt Lake City or Grand
Rapids, Mich. It’s about 20 times the number of people killed in homicides in that length of
time, about twice the number who die of strokes. {1 The death toll from the coronavirus
passed that hard-to-fathom marker on Wednesday, which slipped by like so many other
days in this dark spring, one more spin of the Earth, one more headline in a numbing cas-
cade of grim news. {I Nearly three months into the brunt of the epidemic, 14 percent of
Americans say they know someone who has succumbed to the virus. {I These 100,000 are
not nameless numbers, nor are they mostly famous people. They are, overwhelmingly, el-
derly — in some states, nearly two-thirds of the dead were 80 or older. They are dispro-
portionately poor and black and Latino. Among the younger victims, many did work that

allowed others to stay at home, out of the virus’s reach.
aE ETS 2
Sf

   
   

   

For the most part, they have died alone, leaving parents and siblings and lovers and friends
with final memories not of hugs and whispered devotion, but of miniature images on a
computer screen, tinny voices on the phone, hands pressed against a window.

The dead are not equally dispersed across the land. They perish mostly in pockets — in
huge, frightening outbreaks such as the one in New York City, and in smaller ones, flares of

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200528/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. 100,000

disaster around meatpacking plants, in immigrant neighborhoods and at facilities for the
elderly.

The demise of these 100,000 people has had strangely little public impact in a country with
a long history of honoring its fallen and committing to common cause in their memory.
Americans have responded to the coronavirus pandemic with outpourings of gratitude —
New Yorkers’ nightly chorus of cheers for health-care workers, for example — and wide-
spread cooperation, including extraordinary, quick pivots to staying at home and wearing
masks.

But there have been few expressions of public grief — no gold stars in the windows of
homes where people died, no outcry for national unity or memorials, as happened after the
Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. In this trauma, the enemy is unseen; there is no one
against whom to mobilize the nation’s energy, anger and frustration.

“We're living in a moment when national sentimentality and displays of compassion are
muted because the government doesn’t conceive itself as a first responder,” said Lauren
Berlant, a University of Chicago professor whose work focuses on compassion. “There is
empathy, but it’s been localized — it’s in the states and cities and neighborhoods.”
Despite a death toll that has overwhelmed hospitals and funeral homes, it remains early in
the course of the epidemic. There has been as yet no national requiem, no moment that
captured the collective sense of loss, no president standing atop the ruins, rallying the na-
tion through a bullhorn.

“Maybe,” Berlant said, “it’s hard to mourn when you’re busy trying to sustain life.”

The virus does not seek out the elderly. In Maryland, where the Ocean City boardwalk
teemed with beachgoers over the Memorial Day weekend, fully half of coronavirus cases
involve people between the ages of 20 and 49.

But the roster of deaths tells a different story: The vast majority of the dead have been over
50, according to The Washington Post’s analysis of data from across the country.

The places where America tucks away its elderly — nursing homes, assisted -living facili-
ties, age-restricted developments — are where the virus hits with lethal efficiency.

In Page County, a rural swath of Virginia about 100 miles west of Washington, there have
been 19 coronavirus hospitalizations and 19 deaths. Eighteen of the dead lived at Skyview
Springs Rehab and Nursing Center in Luray, Va., where 94 residents and staffers at the
120-bed facility have tested positive for the virus.

These are disproportionately cruel deaths, especially in facilities where many died in isola-
tion, apart from loved ones.

Sherry Dean Rovelo’s mother, Betty Lou Jason, was in a nursing home in Bluffton, Ohio,
after suffering a stroke at age 80. She contracted the coronavirus and was sent to a hospi-
tal, where Rovelo was not allowed to visit her.

For four days and four nights, Rovelo and her brother watched their mother via an ipad
that a nurse had propped up next to her. Rovelo read and sang and played her mother’s fa-
vorite music, watching as Jason struggled for air. She “could only moan when spoken to,”
her daughter said. Jason, a pastor’s wife, died on Good Friday.

“The grief and guilt of not being there physically with Mom during her last hours are not
likely to leave us anytime soon,” Rovelo said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200528/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. 100,000

Raymond Bullus was 75 and suffering from dementia at a Trenton, N. J ., nursing home
when he contracted the virus last month. His sister, Melanie Branon, who lives in Califor-
nia, received an email. She opened it to find “a horrible picture of death, which I received
without warning,” she said. The email asked her to identify the body, remotely.

“T was never able to communicate with him directly during his five days” in the hospital,
Branon said, “not to offer the comfort of a familiar voice, and tragically, not to even say
goodbye.”

The virus has canceled the rites that human beings have created to usher the people they
love into the nevermore. Funerals, wakes, shivas, burial services — all reduced to a thin,
video-transmitted replica or erased entirely. On New York’s Hart Island, where the city’s
paupers and prisoners have long been buried, workers dug deep trenches and filled them
with stacks of wooden coffins — producing images so painful that police confiscated the
drones photographers used to view the horrific scene.

Coronavirus deaths have come in serial waves of clusters among certain groups in certain
places. They hit first in densely populated settings. Death has come in high concentrations
among people whose jobs require them to work side by side with others — transit workers,
prison guards and inmates, factory workers and meatpackers.

Doctors, nurses and other medical personnel who stepped up to battle an intensely conta-
gious and poorly understood disease are disproportionately represented among the dead.
Paul Cary got behind the wheel of an ambulance and drove 27 hours from Colorado Springs
to the Bronx because he saw that his skills as a paramedic were needed. For three weeks, he
answered 911 calls and ferried coronavirus patients from overloaded hospitals to slightly
less besieged facilities, caring for oxygenstarved victims as his ambulance rumbled
through eerily empty streets.

Then Cary fell ill and entered one of those hospitals himself. He died on April 30 of covid-
19, the disease caused by the coronavirus. He was 66 years old and left behind two children
and four grandchildren. New York’s mayor, Bill de Blasio, promised that the city Cary had
come to help would build a proper memorial to him, someday.

As millions worked from home and millions more lost their work, many Americans’ jobs
still put them in close quarters with other people — sharply increasing their risk of catch-
ing the virus.

Jason Hargrove lost his life driving the bus, taking people to work. One day in March, a
woman got on Hargrove’s city bus in Detroit and repeatedly coughed without covering her
mouth, the driver said in a Facebook video that he posted to express his outrage.

“We're out here as public workers doing our job, trying to make an honest living to take
care of our families,” he said. “For us to get through this and get over this, man, y’all need
to take this s--serious. Folks dying from this.”

Four days later, Hargrove, 50, fell ill with the virus. A week after that, he was dead.

The coronavirus likes a crowd. Superspreading events have been perhaps the most efficient
infection hot spots — sports events, street festivals, weddings. And the lethal danger
spikes indoors, where air is stagnant and people interact at close distances.

Anywhere large groups gather and stay together for a while is problematic, especially if
people are talking loudly, yelling or singing, propelling potentially infected droplets into

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200528/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. 100,000

the air for others to breathe in. Some of the deadliest clusters of cases can be traced to
richly social events: Mardi Gras in Louisiana, chorus practices, corporate meetings.
Patricia Frieson and Wanda Bailey, sisters who lived near

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200528/page/1/textview 4/4
