2020. 6. 17. State shelled out millions on gear

State shelled out millions on gear
Some nobid deals worked, but others led to delays, cancellations

The Dallas Morning News - 10 Jun 2020 - 1A: By ALLIE MORRIS Austin Bureau allie.morris@dallasnews.com

AUSTIN — In its mad dash to buy masks, gowns and other medical supplies to protect
against the coronavirus, Texas is spending millions of dollars in nobid deals and tapping
vendors that have no history doing business with the state.

  

= = oe a

The results have been mixed, according to state payment records and court documents. A
Californiabased fabric firm new to the medical supply business successfully delivered
thousands of gowns on a plane chartered from China. But last month, the state rejected
over 200,000 face masks from another vendor because they turned out to be faulty.

In one unusual arrangement, the state is relying on the Lower Colorado River Authority
and the private Dell Foundation for creative financing for a large shipment of personal
protective equipment from Asia.

As cases of coronavirus climbed, Texas, like many states, had to compete for

scarce personal protective equipment in a turbulent market rife with soaring prices,
hordes of vendors and tales of fraudsters across the country.

The Texas Division of Emergency Management says it has safeguards in place, such as
paying vendors only after supplies arrive and are inspected for quality, a step government
watchdogs endorse.

Canceled deals

Since the pandemic began, the division has ordered over $1.1 billion worth of medical sup-
plies, but has canceled over half the deals because products never arrived or were defec-
tive, a spokesman said. The division has spent $200 million to date on personal protective
equipment, which is being distributed statewide to health care workers and first respon-
ders.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 0/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. State shelled out millions on gear

“The primary goal has been to provide desperately needed PPE to health care workers and
those who needed it to help stop the spread of COVID19,” TDEM spokesman Seth Chris-
tensen said in a statement. “In order to meet the need and to continue preparation for re-
sponding to COVID19 moving forward, diversifying vendors was and still is a necessity, as
no one vendor has been able to meet our increased demand for product.”

The state has paid 106 purchase orders for personal protective equipment, Christensen
said. At least a dozen vendors the division used had no recent history doing business with
the state, according to a review of payment records on the Texas comptroller’s website.
They include medical equipment suppliers, but also a defense contractor and a California-
based fabric sourcing company that turned to medical gowns when the pandemic began.
The company, ICU Production, chartered a plane to fly “a few hundred thousand” gowns
to Texas from factories in China, said CEO Joseph Cohen.

“We just wanted to help with the supply chain,” he said. “When the pandemic started, our
overseas teams had access to the right factories.”

Another vendor, South Carolinabased Infocus Healthcare Consultants, filed a lawsuit
against its supplier last week. It alleges the supplier delivered 207,360 KN95 masks to
TDEM that did not meet federal standards. The state rejected the masks and they were sent
back to the Illinoisbased supplier, the lawsuit says. Neither company offered a comment on
the lawsuit.

Gambling on vendors

The pivot to unfamiliar vendors for PPE is not unique to

Texas, said Michael Carome, director of the Health Research Group at the Washington
D.C.based advocacy group Public Citizen.

“Here we are in circumstances because of critical shortages and states looking for any pos-
sible supplier they are faced with these choices where they have to pick companies and
they don’t know whether they are reputable,” he said.

TDEM found many vendors through an online portal it created early on in the pandemic
that attracted over 4,600 submissions from companies looking to sell the state supplies,
Christensen said. To vet the vendors, the agency goes through a process to verify they can
operate in Texas and to see whether they have done business in the past with other gov-
ernmental entities, he said.

“This step gives our team insight into how familiar the vendor is with government pro-
curement and payment processes,” he said.

Unusual agreement

In one unusual agreement, the state asked the Lower Colorado River Authority to help se-
cure $30 million of supplies by contracting with supply chain company Mentor Media.
TDEM is reimbursing the Colorado agency as personal protective equipment comes in and
has paid at least $17 million to date, officials said.

The Dell Foundation agreed to pay LCRA for supplies that are faulty or that don’t show up,
which has not happened yet, spokespeople from both organizations said.

Christensen said the agreement “allowed for expedited delivery of supplies” at a critical
time. At a recent LCRA board meeting, general manager Phil Wilson described it as “a cre-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 0/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. State shelled out millions on gear

ative way of using our balance sheet to help facilitate some equipment purchases to keep
folks safe.”

Wilson is also filling in as the state Health and Human Services Commission’s acting exec-
utive commissioner, working 80 hours a week between his job at the state agency and at
the LCRA, the Texas Tribune reported.

The contract covers 20 million gloves, 12 million face masks and over 4 million face
shields, among other supplies, records show. Freight costs from Asia make up roughly
20% of the costs, according to TDEM.

The high price of shipping from Asia is not unusual, given the global competition for PPE,
said José E. Camacho, the former executive director of the Texas Association of Community
Health Centers who purchased face masks and other supplies for clinics when the pan-
demic began.

“In a typical environment, yeah, the [costs] would be totally out of whack,” he said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 0/page/1/textview 3/3
