2020. 6. 17. In a coma and fighting covid-19, she lost a baby

In a coma and fighting covid-19, she lost a baby

To Kenna Allen and her family, Treasure, born at 22 weeks, was far more
than a coronavirus statistic

The Washington Post : 12 Jun 2020 - A1 . BY SAMANTHA SCHMIDT IN BATON ROUGE

Anew baby was coming, so the aunts, uncles and cousins arrived by the dozens, their cars
taking up the entire block and the lawn across the street, as they always did for Allen fam-
ily parties. Carrying diapers and wipes, they gathered on the cracked driveway beneath the
arching branches of an oak tree, waiting to learn whether Kenna Allen was having a boy or
a girl.

  

: ee rs re ee he

It was Saturday, March 7, just days before they would learn how dangerous gatherings like
this one had become. In 48 hours, Louisiana would report its first case of a lethal new
virus, a distant worry that no one mentioned as they boiled crawfish and took photos in
matching shirts with the words “He or she, what will baby bee?”

Kenna, a 34-year-old single mother navigating a high-risk pregnancy, took a selfie of her
baby bump at about 18 weeks. She was wearing a “Mommy to bee” sash, part of the bum-
blebee theme she had chosen for the party. Her two daughters, 7 and 15, released blue and
pink smoke bombs on the driveway.

The guests wrote out ideas for names on a chalkboard: For a boy, Traylon, Travis or Taylor.
For a girl, Brooklyn, Taylin or Treasure.

Her best friend and sister, the only ones who knew the baby’s sex, held up a sheet with
rows of black balloons and the words “What will baby be? Pop to see.”

“Hit it!” Kenna’s cousin shouted.

Kenna popped each balloon until a onesie fell out of one of them, revealing what they all
came to learn: The baby would be a girl.

Everyone hollered. Kenna ran from the garage into the living room, overwhelmed and

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200612/page/1/textview 7
2020. 6. 17. In a coma and fighting covid-19, she lost a baby

disappointed. In a family of so many women, Kenna and her daughters had prayed for a
boy. But a few moments later, Kenna walked back outside and smiled.

“This baby is loved,” she told her guests. “I can’t wait for her to be here.”

As a gift, Kenna’s best friend gave her matching necklaces for her three daughters, delicate
gold chains with the words “big sis,” “mid sis,” and “lil sis.”

Second-grader E’lajah imagined teaching her little sister how to dance. Tenth-grader Dar-
rielle dreamed of getting her license and driving around with two little sisters in the back
seat. And Kenna thought about the outfit her baby would wear as she came home from the
hospital in August: A white onesie with pink bows and a rhinestone princess crown.

It was one of the last days before Kenna started seeing stories on the news about people
sickened at the same Mardi Gras parades she’d gone to in New Orleans, before her boss —
worried about her pregnancy — told Kenna to stay home from her job at the Shell plant,
before the virus began ripping through black communities like hers.

Before the day in mid-march when she started feeling a tightness in her chest.

‘Don’t give up’

Kenna pleaded with the doctor at Our Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center not to send
her home.

She had driven herself to the emergency room on March 27 with a fever of 102.6. Her whole
body ached as hospital staffers in protective suits and face shields ushered her into an iso-
lation unit, pumped fluids into her body through an IV and, after ruling out strep throat
and the flu, tested her for the novel coronavirus.

It would take about two days for the test results to come back, but Kenna said the doctors
told her there was an 80 percent chance she would test positive. Still, her temperature had
fallen to 100, chest X-rays showed no signs of pneumonia, an ultrasound showed her
daughter’s heartbeat was normal, and a walking test showed she had normal oxygen satu-
ration levels, said Catherine Smith O’neal, the hospital’s chief medical officer, who re-
viewed Kenna’s medical records with her permission.

The doctor called Kenna’s obstetrician, and after going over her exams and vital signs,
wrote in Kenna’s medical chart that he was “not concerned with the patient’s levels at this
time.” He told her he thought she could fight the virus from home.

Given her age and test results, Kenna was not considered a highrisk covid-19 patient. But
she was also a pregnant woman with diabetes and hypertension in a state with one of the
country’s worst maternal mortality rates, especially for black mothers.

“T’m just not comfortable going home, the way I’m feeling,” Kenna remembers replying.
But he assured her it would be safe. Drink plenty of fluids, he advised, follow up with your
primary-care doctor, and come back if the symptoms get any worse.

“There is just nothing about her exam that says, ‘You’re not going to recover from this like
all of the other 20- and 30-year-olds who we see,’ ” said O’neal, an infectious-disease
specialist. “We have seen pregnant women, and that doesn’t seem to affect how they go. So
while we always worry about pregnancy more, that doesn’t portend a worse outcome in
this disease. She met our criteria for discharge with close monitoring, which is what she
got.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200612/page/1/textview 2/7
2020. 6. 17. In a coma and fighting covid-19, she lost a baby

A nurse offered to help her out in a wheelchair. Kenna refused. A few hours after entering
the hospital, she walked to her car, angry and scared, crying through the 15-minute drive
home.

She and her daughters were living with her mother, Donna Montgomery. They’d been
through some difficult times.

Less than two years earlier,

Darrielle’s father had been shot and killed outside his Baton Rouge home. An article about
his unsolved killing hung on a memory wall above the teenager’s bed. Across the hallway
were photos of Kenna’s father, who had died in 2017 after falling into a diabetic coma on
his 67th birthday.

Kenna now worried about her Type 2 diabetes as she grew weaker, struggling to breathe.
Her pregnancy, with a former partner she was still on good terms with, had been a sur-
prise. She’d just been promoted to shift lead for a contractor at the Shell plant, which
makes catalysts used to refine crude oil into gasoline or diesel fuel. She was saving money
to buy a house for her and the girls.

The virus was threatening all of that. By the time the hospital called with her positive test
results on March 29, her chest felt like it was going to cave in. Her sister, Cindy Allen-
wilson, who lives down the street, had also started feeling sick, and later tested positive for
the coronavirus as well.

By April 1, Kenna was unable to climb out of her mother’s bathtub, next to the second-
floor bedroom where she had been isolated for nearly a week. She feared dying up there
alone, while her children were downstairs and her mother was at work. She called her
OB/GYN’S nurse, Tammy Farrow, who had been checking in with her every day.
“Sometimes, being strong is admitting you need help,” the nurse told her. Kenna called
her mother, who rushed home from her job cleaning office buildings.

As Donna was helping her daughter down the stairs, Kenna collapsed in her arms. She
called 911.

From a room at Woman’s Hospital, where she’d been taken by the ambulance, Kenna sent
her mom, sister and brother-in-law a goodbye text: “I did my best ya’ll I’m sorry.”
“Don’t give up,” her mom responded.

“Fight,” her sister urged. Forty-eight hours later, was placed on a ventilator.

An unknowing delivery

Kenna pulled at the breathing tube down her throat, fighting against the machine as it
pushed air into her lungs. The ventilator would buy her time, doctors hoped, sending oxy-
gen to her brain, her heart, her kidneys, her baby.

At 21 weeks, time was what the baby needed most. Every day mattered, every ounce of
weight essential to her chance at breathing with her own miniature lungs. Every few hours,
the nurses listened to the baby’s heart, making sure it was still beating.

Tammy knew that Kenna was heavily sedated. But the nurse sent her a text message any-
way, hoping she would someday see it.

“Praying God puts his mighty healing hands upon you today and everyday,” she texted
her, “and that you feel his presence mightily.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200612/page/1/textview 3/7
2020. 6. 17. In a coma and fighting covid-19, she lost a baby

Her mother was also texting her prayers. “Lord heal my daughters body in Jesus name,”
Donna wrote.

On the morning of April Donna’s phone rang.

A few hours earlier, a nurse had entered her daughter’s room to find Kenna’s baby under
the covers.

Her womb had contracted, but the ventilator and medications had masked any signs of la-
bor. Kenna had delivered her child without knowing it. The baby was born a day short of 22
weeks, the hospital later said, before most doctors consider a human life viable.

She weighed 14 ounces and stretched 10 inches long, so small her mother could have held
her with one hand. The time stamp on her birth certificate would be 3:42 a.m. but no one
would ever know exactly when she had arrived.

Almost as quickly as she had entered the world, she left it.

“Like most pregnancies that end at this gestational age, the condition is critical and not
compatible with life,” Barbara Griffith, president of Woman’s Hospital, said in a state-
ment.

Kenna’s baby would ultimately test negative for the coronavirus, adding to limited re-
search suggesting the virus is not easily transmitted from mother to fetus. But she lived
long enough to take at least one breath and record a heartbeat. Under Louisiana law, that
meant the coroner would be required to issue a death certificate. The time of death was
4:50 a.m.

Just hours after the hospital called Donna, East Baton Rouge Parish Coroner Beau Clark
shared the news of the “tragic case” during a news briefing on Facebook Live. Without
naming Kenna, he announced the first covid-related death of a baby in Louisiana and one
of the first in the country. Only a few other reports of infant deaths had emerged in con-
nection to the coronavirus, including in Illinois and Connecticut, but the causes of death in
those cases remained unclear.

Clark’s announcement prompted expectant mothers across Louisiana to call their doctors
and nurses, in fear of what the pandemic could mean for their pregnancies.

On Snapchat, Darrielle’s cousin sent her an image of a TV news segment, wondering
whether the coroner was talking about her mother. The 15-year-old hadn’t even known
her mom was on a ventilator.

It was the second time she’d learned devastating news about her family from social media.
In 2018, she found out about her father’s murder from a news report. Now she’d discov-
ered the death of her little sister in the same way.

“I showed my grandmother ... and I was like ‘ for real?’ ” Darrielle said. “You didn’t tell
me?”

Her mother remained sedated on the ventilator, unaware that the nurses had placed her
baby

on her chest for a moment before taking her away.

After the baby’s death, Kenna was given remdesivir, the antiviral drug that has had posi-
tive effects on some covid-19 patients. It was in short supply at that time, but doctors were
able to get an overnight shipment from California.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200612/page/1/textview 47
2020. 6. 17. In a coma and fighting covid-19, she lost a baby

In the days that followed, Kenna’s lungs began to improve. And on April 14, after nearly
two weeks on the ventilator, she started to wake up. She was still heavily sedated once the
ventilator was removed, barely able to speak or move. She wouldn’t remember what the
doctors told her at her bedside that first day, or what she said to her mother and friends as
they cheered and cried over the phone at the sound of her frail voice.

The following morning, her friend Lakeshia Septs called her, anxious to hear how she was
doing. But Kenna sounded confused, and asked Lakeshia if she could come to the hospital
to see the new baby. Lakeshia froze, not knowing what to say. Did Kenna not know what
had happened?

Lakeshia phoned Kenna’s mother, who asked the doctors and nurses to wait for Donna to
be there to tell Kenna about the baby. But the message didn’t make it to a social worker
who walked into Kenna’s room later that day and gave her a form from the coroner’s of-
fice, along with a pamphlet about grief. “What is this?” Kenna asked. “Your baby made na-
tional news,” the woman said. “You didn’t see?”

After the social worker was gone, Kenna pulled out her phone and searched: “first baby to
pass away covid related baton rouge.”

She cried alone as she read through the news article.

It had to be my baby, she thought.

She’d lost her child in a state with one of the highest infant mortality rates in the country,
where black babies are more than twice as likely to die as white babies. The maternal mor-
tality rate is the highest in the United States: Black women in Louisiana are more than two
times as likely as white women to die of pregnancy-related complications. Yet Kenna, bat-
tling a virus killing thousands of black people, had survived — barely.

On her last day at the hospital, her nurses rolled her in a wheelchair up and down the hall-
ways of two floors, as medical staff clapped and cheered. Kenna cupped her face in her
hands, sobbing as her sister, daughters, cousins, aunts, nieces and friends surprised her at
the hospital entrance, screaming and holding signs with the words “You Made It” and “It
was God’s Grace.” A nurse who was off work that day came to the hospital anyway, without
her scrubs, to hug Kenna goodbye.

Then her sister and mother helped her into the passenger seat of the car, driving Kenna
home without the baby she’d never met.

The baby she had named Treasure.

‘Why her?’

Donna untangled the strings of the Disney princess and Minnie Mouse balloons from Dol-
lar Tree on a May afternoon, handing them out to relatives.

“These were all the balloons they had,” Donna said. “Mother’s Day took all of them.”
Kenna picked one with a crown and the word “Princess,” and leaned against the couch in
the dimly lit living room, beneath a yellow banner with a photo of Kenna and the words
“WELCOME HOME WE LOVE YOU.”

She’d been home from the hospital for three weeks, but could still hardly walk. She spent
most of her days on the couch or in bed, coughing and fighting migraines. Her doctors said
it could take up to six months to fully recover. But now she felt strong enough to slowly

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200612/page/1/textview 5/7
2020. 6. 17. In a coma and fighting covid-19, she lost a baby

limp out to the driveway on her own, to remember the baby she had not yet been able to
fully grieve.

“Can I write on the balloon?” said E’lajah, who had celebrated her eighth birthday while
her mother was in the hospital. “How do you spell ‘sister’?”

On the princess balloon, in blue marker, Kenna wrote: “I wanted you here but God need
you more. It’s ok we’ll meet again soon.” Then she joined the circle of family and friends in
the grass beneath the oak tree, the same place where just two months earlier she had
learned she was having a baby girl.

“Alright ya’ll, we’re going to get started,” Donna said, telling each person to go around the
circle and say a few words for Kenna and Treasure.

“Kenna, we love you,” her sister, Cindy, said. “I know you would’ve been a good mom."
“My little sister, you’re always going to be in my heart,” E’lajah said. “Even though I never
got to see you, I’m pretty sure you’re a beautiful angel.”

“Kenna, we know you had a long road,” her brother-in-law, Scott Wilson, said. “Just keep
on pushing.”

They each released a balloon into the sky, watching it float past the tree’s branches.
Waiting to go last, Kenna toyed with the white strings, wrapping them around her bright
green fingernails as she thought about what to say. She’d hardly spoken about Treasure
since coming home. She hadn’t looked through the flash drive of photos from the hospital,
or the box of white embroidered linens given to every mom who loses a baby. She had only
managed a glance at the pink card with her daughter’s footprints, and the words “A Tiny
Treasure.”

She had refused to go upstairs to the closet filled with bags of baby clothes — unicorn
socks, rainbow bibs, onesies with words like “Sunshine” and “Happy Everyday.” Pink
skirts and pink sweaters and even tiny pink hangers. She couldn’t bear to see any of it.
Kenna hoped to give the clothes to another family, one she heard about while she was still
in the hospital. Another pregnant black woman had been hospitalized with her for covid-
19. The woman, 31 years old and seven months pregnant, had also given birth prematurely.
The baby survived, but the mother did not. A nurse later told Kenna that the woman, Ajo-
raica Parker, had been in the room next to hers.

Kenna thought about Parker as she stood in the grass, holding her bundle of four balloons.
That could have been her, she told her relatives.

“T’m glad that I made it, though in the process I lost my baby,” Kenna said. “I think about
her all day, every day. I have so many questions of why. Why me? Why her?”

Her sister put her hand on Kenna’s back, filming her speaking on her iphone. Tears
streamed down Kenna’s face.

“T want my baby back,” Kenna said. “I know that’s not going to happen. I know God is go-
ing to take care of her best.”

Then she kissed the Minnie Mouse balloon, touching the strings once more before releas-
ing all four balloons into the sky. She watched as they split apart above the trees, drifting
off.

‘I want a baby sister’

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200612/page/1/textview 6/7
2020. 6. 17. In a coma and fighting covid-19, she lost a baby

“Ya'll can have a seat,” a woman in a mask said as Kenna limped over to a brown leather
couch next to a grandfather clock. With her mother across from her, Kenna sat with her
arms wrapped over her stomach, waiting for her baby’s ashes. The funeral director walked
in, holding a blue bag.

“This is everything, right here,” he said, gently handing it to Kenna.

From the blue bag she pulled out three boxes. Inside two of them were lockets, one silver
and one gold, each around its own chain. The third white box, sealed tightly shut, con-
tained the rest of the baby’s remains, the funeral director told her.

“Thank you,” Kenna said. The funeral director held the door for them on their way out.

As her mother drove home, Kenna sat silently in the back seat, scrolling through the posts
on her Facebook timeline, videos from her weeks in the hospital. She held the blue bag in
her lap as she looked out the window, past a cemetery, past a long line for the drive-
through at Checkers, past a clinic where a group of healthcare workers were taking a group
photo outside, next to a sign that read “Heroes work here.” The only sound in the car was
her mother’s soul music radio station, 106.5.

When they got home, Kenna sat down on the couch next to E’lajah.

Donna turned the light on and took the silver necklace out of its box, untangling the chain.
E’lajah looked at the locket, engraved with footprints and the words “Mommy of an An-
gel.”

“Something inside that?” E’lajah asked.

“Treasure,” her mother said. The 8-year-old’s eyes widened. “Her body?”

Kenna nodded. E’lajah ran her hands over the box for one of the lockets. She went to the
kitchen and grabbed a pencil, asking her mother if she could write on the container, and
how to spell her sister’s name.

Sitting next to her, Kenna whispered the letters: “T-R-E-AS-U-R-E,” as E’lajah wrote the
name on the box, next to the words “We love you.”

“T want a baby sister,” the 8-year-old said to Kenna.

“T could buy you a baby doll?” Kenna said.

“T don’t want a baby doll,” E’lajah said. “I want a real life baby sister.”

She curled up next to her mother, under a fleece blanket.

“Alright, you ready?” Donna said, holding the locket.

She reached around Kenna’s neck and gently fastened the chain.

“T’m glad that I made it, though in the process I lost my baby. I think about her all day, ev-
ery day.”

Kenna Allen, speaking at a memorial service for daughter Treasure

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200612/page/1/textview W7
