2020. 6. 18. TOO FAMILIAR

TOO FAMILIAR

The Oklahoman - 1 Jun 2020 - Ai - By Tim Reynolds

  

Former Thunder player Thabo Sefolosha also was beaten by police

Floyd's death opens old wounds for ex-Thunder player Sefolosha

Thabo Sefolosha knows what it's like to be a black man, on the ground, being beaten by
police officers.

Such was the scenario when George Floyd died in Minneapolis last week.

And five years ago, Sefolosha found himself in a similarly frightening place.

“T was just horrified by what I saw," Sefolosha said. “That could have been me."

Time has not healed all wounds for Sefolosha, the NBA veteran and former Oklahoma City
Thunder starter who said he was attacked by a group of New York Police Department offi-
cers in April 2015 while they were arresting him outside a nightclub in the city's Chelsea
neighborhood. The leg that was broken in the fracas is fine now. The emotional pain roared
back last week when he saw video of Floyd, a handcuffed black man who pleaded for air in
the final moments of his life as a white police officer — subsequently charged with murder
— pressed a knee on his neck.

Se fol os ha has seen the video. He hasn‘ t watched much news since. His experience with
police in New York has left him with a deep distrust of law enforcement, the pangs of angst
flooding back even when he walks into NBA arenas and sees uniformed officers. And the
latest example of police brutality left him even more upset.

“People talk about a few rotten apples ,” Se fol os ha said in an interview with The Associ-
ated Press. “But you know, in my experience and from what we' re seeing, I think it's
deeper than that as a culture that's deeply rooted in it, to be honest. That's just my honest
opinion. I think it's really ... part of a culture where it's deeper than just a few bad apples.”
The four officers who were involved in the incident where Floyd died were fired; the one
who knelt on Floyd's neck, Derek Ch au vin, has been charged with third-degree murder
and second- degree manslaughter. Massive protests have broken out in several cities in
recent days,

the country torn again over a black man dying at the hands of police.

Se fol os ha—a black man of Swiss descent who plays for the Houston Rockets—considered
but decided against joining protests in Atlanta, where he is waiting for the resumption of
the NBA season that was shutdown in March because of the coronavirus pandemic.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/20200601/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. TOO FAMILIAR

“I'm mad, for sure ,” Sefolosha said. “That's for sure. I mean, it' s 2020. Nobody should
have to go through this in this time, especially after black people have given up so much
for America. Black people have given up so much and done so much for this country. It's
hurtful to see it this way.”

Sefolosha's perspective changed forever on April 8, 2015. Chris Copeland, an NBA player at
the time, was among three people stabbed outside the club where Sefolosha was that night;
police arrived and ordered everyone to leave the area. Sefolosha says he complied but be-
gan getting harassed by officers anyway.

Before long, he was on the ground.

Se fol os ha' s leg was broken and some ligaments were torn in the fracas, and he was ar-
rested ons everal charges that a jury needed about 45 minutes to determine were un-
founded. He wound up suing for $50 million, alleging his civil rights were violated, settled
for $4 million and gave much of that money to a public defenders' organization working in
marginalized communities.

“It changed me a lot, toward the way I see law enforcement in this country,” Sefolosha
said.

“And also toward the way I see the whole justice system. I went to court and I had to do all
of this to prove my innocence. It really got me deep into the system and I'm really skeptical
of t he whole system.”

NBA players have used their platforms often in recent years to protest racial inequality.
Sterling Brown of the Milwaukee Bucks filed a federal civil rights lawsuit after police used a
stun gun on him and arrested him over a parking incident in 2018. On Saturday, Malcolm
Brogdon of the Indiana Pacers and Jaylen Brown of the Boston Celtics were among those
taking part in Atlanta protests.

“You see what happened in Minnesota where three human beings with a badge are watch-
ing another human being killing somebody,” said Sefolosha, who has played in the NBA
since 2006 and intend store turn to Switzerland when he retires. “And instead of saying,
OK, this is my duty as a human being,' the duty was more toward not interfering with the
other officer and saying, ‘ We are clan, we stick together no matter what." It should be the
other way around."

The NBA is closing in on finalizing a plan to resume the season in July at t he Disney com-
plex near Orlando, Florida. Sefolosha and the Rockets figure to be contenders for a cham-
pionship when play resumes.

For obvious reasons, Sefolosha's mind isn' t there yet.

“T' ll be happy to be with my teammates and reunited with basketball in general,” Se-
folosha said. “But you know, we're human beings, and the fight has been going on for too
long and the same protests have been going on for too long. I think it's definitely time for
change and that should be a priority for all of us.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/20200601/page/1/textview 2/2
