2020. 6. 17. Baylor Scott & White Health, the largest notforprofit hospital system in Texas, will lay off roughly 1,200 employees due to fallout fro...

Baylor Scott & White Health, the largest notforprofit hospital
system in Texas, will lay off roughly 1,200 employees due to
fallout from the virus.

Hospital system will also furlough others, cut executives’ salaries

The Dallas Morning News - 27 May 2020 - 1A - By MITCHELL SCHNURMAN Staff Writer mschnurman@dallasnews.com

Baylor Scott & White Health, the largest notforprofit hospital system in Texas, will lay off
roughly 1,200 employees, or almost 3% of its workforce, due to fallout from the coron-
avirus.

Baylor said it would also furlough an unspecified number of workers, leave open positions
unfilled and cut the pay of about 300 senior leaders.

Furloughed employees, who are generally eligible for unemployment insurance, will con-
tinue to get company benefits and may be asked to return to the job eventually.

Like many providers, Baylor had beefed up for a potential surge in COVID19 patients,
spending $85 million to stockpile supplies, modify facilities and create virtual care op-
tions. At the same time, government officials suspended nonurgent surgeries and proce-
dures to preserve medical equipment and hospital bed

space. They also ordered most residents to stay home.

While the number of local COVID19 cases has been lower than feared, the financial effects
from the pandemic and the lockdown have been severe.

“We experienced a dramatic drop in patient volumes — between 50% and 90%, depending
upon where they sought care,” Baylor CEO Jim Hinton told employees in a video message.
The company’s first instinct was to protect workers, he said, so it pledged to keep paying
everyone through May. But that won’t be sustained beyond the first week of June, despite
an improvement in business in the past several weeks.

“Tt has become clear that we must reexamine everything,” Hinton said.

Frontline workers who are delivering care to patients are largely unaffected by the layoffs,
Hinton said in an interview. The furloughs are more mixed, including clinicians in areas
with fewer patients at the moment.

“‘We’ll need those people to come back as the volume comes back,” Hinton said.

The job cuts announced Tuesday appear to be the deepest in Baylor’s history, a spokes-
woman said. Those being laid off will be notified this week and will be paid through June 7.
Nearly 39 million Americans have filed unemployment claims since midmarch, and every
job sector has been hit. Health care lost over 1.4 million jobs from March to April, accord-
ing to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.

But hospitals, which employ over 5 million nationwide, have held up better than other
providers. Hospitals lost 135,000 workers in April, less than 3% of their workforce. Over
the same month, doctors’ offices lost 9% of employees and dental practices lost over half.
Hundreds of hospitals across the country have announced furloughs, pay cuts, reduced
hours and layoffs in the wake of the coronavirus.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200527/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Baylor Scott & White Health, the largest notforprofit hospital system in Texas, will lay off roughly 1,200 employees due to fallout fro...

The Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn., said it would furlough or cut work hours for 30,000
employees and cut pay for physicians and senior leaders. Together, the measures are pro-
jected to save over $1 billion, helping offset $3 billion in costs related to COVID19.

The University of Rochester Medical Center in New York said it would furlough 3,474 em-
ployees, or more than 19% of its workforce, after trying other costsaving measures.

Tenet Healthcare, a Dallasbased company with hospitals throughout the country, an-
nounced furloughs for 3,400 hospital workers last month. That followed 500 furloughs of
corporate staff and pledges from senior executives to donate part of their salaries to an
employee assistance fund.

Baylor, whose headquarters is near its flagship Baylor University Medical Center in Dallas,
has almost 43,000 employees. It operates 50 hospitals and over 200 outpatient and surgery
centers that stretch from Sherman to San Marcos. Baylor had almost 4 million patient en-
counters in 2019.

Last year, Baylor reported $10 billion in revenue and $725 million in operating income, ac-
cording to its financial reports.

Its cash cushion has been shrinking. Baylor reports unrestricted cash as measured by the
number of days it could cover operating expenses. On March 31, Baylor had 187 days of un-
restricted cash, down from 219 days on June 30, 2019.

The declining cash position reflects the virus’s impact on Baylor in the early stages, Hint...
said. In March, the system invested in protective equipment and facility modifications, but
it had not yet received cash grants or other liquidity assistance from the federal govern-
ment.

“We were beginning to get into what we called the trough,” Hinton said.

Additional costsaving measures include temporary pay cuts for executives. CEO Hinton and
President Peter Mccanna will have their salaries reduced by 25%, Hinton said. The rest of
the senior leadership team — about 300 executives across the system — will have their pay
reduced by 10% to 20%, Hinton told employees.

The pay cuts will be reviewed by Baylor’s board in three to four months, he said. Depend-
ing on the company’s progress, the board may do a partial restoration of the executives’
pay and revisit the matter again later.

Baylor expects to “flex” more employees to areas with greater demand, Hinton said, and
it’s also working on “a new compensation model” with Baylor’s physician group.

“All of these changes are designed to keep us flexible and prepared through the unknowns
of the coming months,” Hinton said.

Yet Baylor is also planning to boost the salaries of almost 12,000 nurses and support per-
sonnel, including medical assistants, procedural technicians and more. The size of the in-
crease was not disclosed.

“We thought very hard about whether we could afford to do that in this environment,”
Hinton said.

He acknowledged that it seems counterintuitive, but Baylor is moving forward “because of
how critical these nurses are.”

Patient volumes are beginning to recover impressively. As of this week, activity was over
90% of PRECOVID levels for Baylor clinics, hospital admissions and operating room cases,

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200527/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Baylor Scott & White Health, the largest notforprofit hospital system in Texas, will lay off roughly 1,200 employees due to fallout fro...

a spokeswoman said. Many patients are getting treatment that had been postponed so it’s
hard to know the steady state of business.

“We're in a little bit of a waitandsee game now to see if these volumes are going to be back
on a consistent basis,” Hinton said.

Over 1 million Texans are projected to lose their employersponsored insurance, according
to an Urban Institute study. That will drive up uncompensated costs for providers like Bay-
lor. Other patients may end up on government programs that pay less than commercial
rates.

That makes it difficult to project how long it will take for Baylor to recover, and that’s be-
fore concerns about a second wave of the pandemic.

“The only thing we know for sure is that we don’t know for sure,” Hinton said.

Congress has authorized trillions of dollars in pandemic relief programs, and Baylor has
already tapped into some. It received about $172 million from a $100 billion package ear-
marked for providers affected by COVID19, Hinton said. He believes it’s eligible for about
$100 million more — and none of that money has to be repaid.

Separately, the company sought about $660 million in Medicare advance payments and
it’s deferring payroll taxes. While those moves boost liquidity, the debts must be paid off.
Baylor has almost $5 billion in unrestricted funds. While that’s a big number, Hinton said,
it covers only 187 days of operating expenses, far fewer than at the end of fiscal 2019.
Baylor monitors that metric closely, and the declining trend means it wouldn’t pull out
more cash to avoid job cuts.

“We believe that the tradeoff we need to make here is to have the small reduction in force
and the furlough,” Hinton said, “and bring people back as quickly as we can so that we can
restore our days of cash to where they ultimately need to be.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200527/page/1/textview 3/3
