2020. 6. 17. Penney an attractive buy?

Penney an attractive buy?
J.C. Penney’s private labels may lure online giant away from Kohl’s

The Dallas Morning News - 30 May 2020 - 1A - By MARIA HALKIAS Staff Writer mhalkias@dallasnews.com

Penney’s privatelabel business may be why analysts are buzzing about whether Amazon

 

 

 

How can a company reorganizing in a stressful bankruptcy — during a onceinacentury
pandemic no less — launch a new bedding line? J.C. Penney knows how, and that’s because
it has been doing privatelabel merchandise longer than most of its competitors.

The chain created a line of sheets and quilts called Linden Street to compete with specialty
stores. It started selling the brand this week online, at the same time it’s reopening stores.
Penney’s privatelabel business has historically been one of the best in retailing. And it may
be one of the reasons analysts are buzzing about whether Amazon might buy part or all of
the 118yearold department store.

The fashion business publication Wwd.com reported last week that Amazon had boots on
the ground at Penney’s headquarters in Plano. Neither company has commented on the
rumor.

The report quoted a source: “There is an Amazon team in Plano as we speak. There is a di-
alogue, and I’m told it has a lot to do with Amazon eager to expand its apparel business —
for sure.”

Immediately, critics started saying “no way.” But Penney has been building brands for
decades.

Plenty of analysts and other retail observers expect Amazon to buy Kohl’s instead of Pen-
ney. Both chains have real estate to offer, but Penney has not just stores but a solid distri-
bution network and its popular privatelabel lines.

Penney built its strength in a different era when powerful regional department stores
could squeeze out the national chains — Penney and Sears — from the brands that they
wanted exclusively.

“Everyone still has a huge amount of respect for Penney’s private brand organization,”
said Liz Sweney, who has been consulting the past five years after leaving Penney as chief
merchant.

Amazon doesn’t break out its apparel sales, but several analysts estimated that, before

the pandemic, it was on its way to leaping over Target and Walmart to have the largest ap-
parel market share. But the same analysts will tell you that Amazon needs help with its ap-
https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200530/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Penney an attractive buy?

parel business.

“Amazon sells a lot of dresses because it sells a lot of everything,” Sweney said, “but they
have to put some equity behind some real brands.”

Penney’s own brands — Arizona, St. John’s Bay, a.n.a., Liz Claiborne, Stafford and Xersion
— have customer followings. The retailer has buying offices in nine countries and pur-
chases merchandise from 2,800 domestic and foreign suppliers.

Most of the team put together by CEO Jill Soltau since late 2018 has apparel and home ex-
perience. Stacey Shively, senior vice president and general merchandise manager for Pen-
ney’s home division, came to Penney after 17 years at Target.

Shively said she found that “all the fundamental pieces of sourcing and design were still at
Penney.”

One weakness was that Penney merchants may have looked back at last year too much.
Now they’ve shifted to be more forwardlooking.

The Linden Street bedding and sheets are made of 100% cotton and are designed for layer-
ing. But Penney didn’t emphasize a soughtafter designation, Shively said — the OEKOTEX
certification that merchandise is free from more than 300 harmful substances.

“Other competitors had the certification and so did we, but why aren’t we telling it?”
Shively said.

Many still believe that Amazon will eventually buy Kohl’s because Amazon customers can
drop off their returns at Kohl’s stores.

But Kohl’s has shown some weakness recently, even before the pandemic.

Kohl’s said last week that improving its women’s apparel performance is a top priority. It’s
exiting eight women’s underperforming private brands. Next year, it’s adding the Toms
brand and Lands’ End, which had shops inside Sears stores for many years.

Retail analyst Robin Lewis wrote in The Robin Report last week that Jeff Bezos would be
making a “huge strategic mistake” if he purchased Penney, calling it “a rather dumb
idea.”

Lewis is in the camp that thinks buying Kohl’s “would be a smart idea.” His reasons in-
clude that Kohl’s is bigger than Penney in sales, market share and store count, and that
most of Penney’s stores are in malls “where traffic has been tanking for years even before
the virus.”

Penney has 11 distribution centers, and those stores could help Amazon with its lastmile
delivery efforts, Sweney said.

“Tf the Penney store is in a prime spot like (Highway) 121 and the (Dallas North) Tollway,
who cares if it’s in a dead mall?” she said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200530/page/1/textview 2/2
