2020. 6. 16. Turmoil in Hong Kong

Turmoil in Hong Kong

The Washington Post - 25 May 2020 - A1 - BY SHIBANI MAHTANI shibani.mahtani@washpost.com Anna Fifield
contributed to this report.

Police used tear gas and water cannons as thousands protested a Chinese law on the re-

gion’s autonomy.
Ee : :

a exes Jee [24% ) (ecw
ia ¥ I + ae

           

art i”

HONG KONG — Police fired rounds of tear gas, used a water cannon to disperse protesters
and arrested more than 100 people opposed to Beijing’s plan to impose a sweeping na-
tional security law in a return to the demonstrations that defined this city last year.
Despite social distancing measures that prohibit gatherings of more than eight and laws
on illegal assembly, tens of thousands of people thronged through Hong Kong’s Causeway
Bay shopping district on Sunday afternoon. Calls to assemble were made online without a
formal organizer or permit.

Refrains of last year’s protests — “fight for freedom,” “stand with Hong Kong” — echoed
on the streets among people of all ages, along with some newer ones: “Hong Kong inde-
pendence, the only way out.” Some carried posters declaring that “heaven will destroy the
Chinese Communist Party.”

“If we don’t come out today to fight back, this may be the last time,” said Chris, a 19-year-
old protester who spoke on the condition that only his first name be used because he had
been arrested once before for participating in an illegal protest. “Maybe tomorrow, Hong
Kong will be China, and we can’t even say a single word of criticism on the Internet with-
out being arrested.”

Some activists gathered near the starting point of the planned march under the auspices of
a “health talk,” claiming they were exempt from restrictions on public gatherings. They
were arrested nonetheless for unauthorized assembly.

The protest soon descended into familiar scenes: bottles thrown at police, rounds of tear
gas fired in response, cat-andmouse tactics between protesters and officers, and eventu-
ally arrests. By Sunday night, police said they had arrested at least 180, mostly on charges
of unlawful assembly.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200525/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 16. Turmoil in Hong Kong

The new national security law will criminalize “foreign interference,” secessionist activi-
ties and subversion of state power. Beijing plans to impose it by decree, bypassing the leg-
islative processes set up in Hong Kong by the 1997 handover from Britain.

The move undermines Hong Kong’s constitution, the Basic Law, and essentially discards
the “one country, two systems” approach meant to preserve the city’s autonomy until at
least 2047.

U.S. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo has called the law “a death knell” for Hong Kong’s
autonomy. National security adviser Robert C. O’brien said Sunday that a Chinese effort to
assert dominance over Hong Kong would draw U.S. financial sanctions against both.
Speaking on NBC’S “Meet the Press,” O’brien predicted that global financial firms and
welleducated residents would flee Hong Kong.

“It’s hard to see how Hong Kong can remain the Asian financial center it’s become if China
takes over,” he said.

In Beijing, Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi said Sunday that legislation was “urgent and
imperative” after the protests that erupted last year.

“These protests had posed a grave threat to Hong Kong’s prosperity and stability and to
the practice of ‘one country, two systems,’ ” Wang said at a news conference on the side-
lines of the annual National People’s Congress.

He said establishing a new legal system and enforcement mechanisms was “a pressing
priority” and China “must get it done without the slightest delay.”

But he characterized the new law as narrowly defined.

“This has no impact on Hong Kong’s high degree of autonomy, the rights and freedoms of
Hong Kong residents, or the legitimate rights and interests of foreign investors in Hong
Kong,” he said.

Just 20 minutes after the march Sunday was due to start, protesters had spilled onto roads,
snarling traffic in scenes reminiscent of the months of sometimes violent unrest last year.
Police moved quickly to disperse them, firing several rounds of tear gas into the crowd,
leaving the elderly coughing and choking and parents rushing children into malls for
safety as the shutters closed on them.

At one point, police fired a water cannon mounted on an armored truck at protesters and
then into the air.

Even after most of the activists scattered, police remained on the streets of downtown.
Some people shouted “communist thugs” at them.

In some cases, protesters attempted to build barricades in the streets to hinder police
movement — a hallmark of last year’s protest — but they failed to hold them back for
long. A heavy riot police presence blocked dozens of roads and fortified subway stations in
a show of force across the heart of the city.

Police said that the demonstrators were “causing serious obstruction to the road traffic”
and that they used “minimum necessary force” to disperse them.

“Police do not condone the unlawful and violent acts of rioters and warn against all dis-
ruptions that endanger public safety and breach the public peace,” police said in a state-
ment.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200525/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 16. Turmoil in Hong Kong

A spokesman for the Hong Kong government condemned “violent acts” and labeled pro-
testers advocates of independence. The events show “rioters remain rampant, reinforcing
the need and urgency of the legislation on national security,” the spokesman said.

The clashes appeared to mark the beginning of what will probably be a long and restive
summer in Hong Kong, as thousands pledge to never give up the fight against Beijing’s
control, despite their diminishing power.

Protesters say they want to continue living with the freedoms they have always enjoyed
rather than being subsumed into mainland China.

The turmoil erupted last year with the introduction of a bill that would have allowed crimi-
nal extraditions to mainland China. The protests grew into a political movement pushing
back against Beijing’s encroachment on the city’s political freedoms.

Under the 1997 agreement, Hong Kong administers its own affairs — save defense and
foreign relations — and has become a thriving center for finance and media.

“1’m worried about my future, but it is pointless to think of that now,” said Fong, a pro-
tester who spoke on the condition that only her last name be used for fear of arrest. “I
know we have no power against Beijing, but we still have to stand up and say to the world
that this is bad for Hong Kong.”

“Tf we don’t come out today to fight back, this may be the last time.”

Chris, a 19-year-old protester

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200525/page/1/textview 3/3
