2020. 6. 17. Wilting business: A florist struggles to keep her family’s store afloat.

Wilting business: A florist struggles to keep her family’s store
afloat.

Florist mourns her mom and tries to keep the family business afloat

The Washington Post : 29 May 2020 - A1 - BY KAREN HELLER

Florists dream of spring, when shops burst in a colorful riot of blooms while ledgers pool
in black ink. First Communions, Palm Sunday, Easter, proms, charity events, weddings,
more weddings and the flowery grail of Mother’s Day. But spring has been brutal for Jenny
Latham, owner of Celidan Creations Florist in Naperville, Il.

   

founded in 1992 by Latham’s mother, Karin Jacobs, supplies churches, restaurants and
corporate offices in the city of almost 150,000, west of Chicago. All were closed due to
covid-19. Celidan’s front door locked, too. The shop remained open to phone and online
orders and was permitted to make deliveries for what has become known in the industry as
ring-and-run.

Florists are there to celebrate life’s memorable moments. Celidan’s schedule had been
loaded with the promise of bouquets, boutonnieres, corsages and table arrangements. Ina
normal year, the shop does 40 weddings, multiple proms. All proms were canceled. The
weddings, reduced to 22 and requiring only a $200 deposit, keep being pushed back later
into this year and the next.

April brought few big events, except death. Including Jacobs, who died April 7 of colon can-
cer at age 74.

Now, Celidan is in danger of dying, too. Last April, in the before times, Celidan grossed
$35,000. Last month’s receipts totaled $6,000, “mostly because of funerals,” Latham
says. The monthly rent is $3,800.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200529/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Wilting business: A florist struggles to keep her family’s store afloat.

“The whole town loved her,” she says of her mother. “People keep asking, ‘ Are you going
to keep it running?’ ” And she begins to cry.

The pandemic and ensuing public health restrictions have destroyed more than 100,000
small businesses so far. Embracing risk, becoming your own boss and executing a distinct
vision are part of the American Dream. The shuttering of a small business shreds jobs, de-
stroys security and flattens commercial districts. A vacant store is an eyesore and a well of
heartache. It represents the death of someone’s fervent aspiration.

Jacobs, an exuberant woman born in Remscheid, Germany, launched the floral department
in the grocery where she worked but dreamed of her own shop. Her daughter, who went to
school for education, shared her vision.the cozy store is decorated in natural colors, star-
burst pendants dangling from the ceiling, with gifts

interspersed among the plants.

Celidan is located in Naperville Plaza, a strip mall at the corner of Gartner and Washington,
home to Oswald’s Pharmacy (established 1875) and Casey’s Foods (opened in 1969, cele-
brated for its meat market), the sort of entities that help make Naperville Naperville. Sure,
there’s a Trader Joe’s — Celidan stopped stocking orchids because it couldn’t compete
with a $15 phalaenopsis — but the country has more than 500 Trader Joe’s, each one fea-
turing Hawaiian-shirted employees, wood decorating accents and too many frozen
dumpling options.

Then again, five decades ago, Trader Joe’s was also a small business.

For years, the city magazine tapped Celidan — a mash-up of the three original employees’
middle names — as Naperville’s second-best florist, tied with another. Did this bother Ja-
cobs? Not at all.

“That was something she was so proud of with so many florists in town!” Latham wrote in
her mother’s death notice. Being crowned the best became a goal.

“Karin’s death hit everyone so hard. It’s like losing a member of the family,” says Carol
Gallagher, a customer of 25 years who hired Celidan for her three daughters’ weddings.
Latham says she didn’t qualify for a Paycheck Protection Program loan because her mother
is still listed as president of the corporation. Though she’s the named beneficiary of the
business, Latham doesn’t yet hold enough of a stake to secure the funds.

To keep the business open, she decided to seek $15,000 through Gofundme. “You worry
what people will think because it seems a site for nonprofits,” she says. These days, Celi-
dan is hardly profitable.

“T have made so many personal calls to let people know of her passing while the virus has
paused our business,” Latham wrote in her solicitation. “We are trying to navigate the
rules of small businesses opening in the next months as well as grieve the loss of Karin.”
In just over a month, she has raised less than a seventh of her goal.

Larger, more established florists are also hurting. Chuck Knoll is part of the fifth genera-
tion to run Walter Knoll Florist, an institution since the 1880s, with six locations in the St.
Louis area. He’s working with half of his regular staff of 100, a fifth of them family, includ-
ing the sixth generation.

Revenue has been more than halved. In the beginning of the pandemic, a quarter of the in-
come came from funerals. “Florists are very entrepreneurial people. They have to reinvent

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200529/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Wilting business: A florist struggles to keep her family’s store afloat.

themselves. It took 21/ years to get

2 back after 9/11,” he says. “But I don’t see us recovering in the near future.”

With the lifting of restrictions, Celidan opened its doors in time for Mother’s Day, when
almost a third of U.S. residents purchase flowers, according to the Society for American
Florists. The holiday represents a quarter of all annual florist sales.

Latham, 50, a mother of three and married to a postal worker, labored from 7 a.m. to mid-
night Friday and 7 a.m. to 10 p.m. Saturday with a reduced staff of three designers, includ-
ing herself. She was forced to turn away orders.

“As busy as we seemed,” Latham says, and her voice trails off. The shop took in $20,000,
half of last year’s bounty.

There’s hand sanitizer on the counter. There’s no tape to keep customers six feet apart be-
cause, she says, “frankly, we’re not that busy.” Latham increased the store’s presence on-
line, where she sells garden gnomes and other statuary.

“As her daughter and employee throughout, it is a big goal to come back strong,” Latham
wrote of her mom in her Gofundme plea. “If we find the economy has bounced back and we
are doing better, we will donate any extra money in the fund to a charity in Karin’s name.
Thank you so much for the support. We enjoy being your local florist.”

Gallagher, her loyal customer, says, “I hope they weather the storm because it would really
be tough to lose your mother and the business she built.” Her son made sure to purchase
her Mother’s Day arrangement from Celidan, of purple liatris, pink lilies, yellow tulips,
gerbera daisies and daisy poms.

“The whole town loved her. People keep asking, ‘Are you going to keep it running?’ ”
Jenny Latham, remembering her mother, Celidan Creations founder Karin Jacobs

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200529/page/1/textview 3/3
