2020. 6. 17. Few vets will make trip to commemorate Dday

Few vets will make trip to commemorate Dday
Pandemic means few vets, officials will make the trip

The Dallas Morning News - 6 Jun 2020 - 1A - By RAF CASERT

Today marks 76 years since Dday, and it will be one of the loneliest remembrances ever.
= —

   

—aee ara

SAINTLAURENTSURMER, France — At least the dead will always be there.

All too many have been, for 76 years since that fateful June 6 on France’s Normandy
beaches, when Allied troops in 1944 turned the course of World War II and went on to de-
feat fascism in Europe in one of the most remarkable feats in military history.

Forgotten they will never be. Revered, yes. But Saturday’s anniversary will be one of the
loneliest remembrances ever, as the coronavirus pandemic is keeping almost everyone
away — from government leaders to frail veterans who might not get another chance for a
final farewell to their unlucky comrades.

Rain and wind are also forecast, after weeks of warm, sunny weather.

“TI miss the others,” said Charles Shay, who as a U.S. Army medic was in the first wave of
soldiers to wade ashore at Omaha Beach under relentless fire on Dday.

Shay, 95, lives in France close to the beach where he and so many others landed in 1944. He
knows of no U.S. veterans making the trip overseas to observe Dday this year.

“T guess I will be alone here this year,” Shay said before he performed a Native American
ritual to honor his comrades by spreading the smoke of burning white sage into the winds
lashing the Normandy coast on Friday.

The eerie atmosphere touches the French as well as Americans.

“The sadness is almost too much, because there is no one,” said local guide Adeline James.
“Plus you have their stories. The history is sad and it’s even more overwhelming now be-
tween the weather, the [virus] situation and, and, and.”

The locals in this northwestern part of France have come out year after year to show their
gratitude for the soldiers from the United States, Britain, Canada and other countries who
liberated them from Adolf Hitler’s Nazi forces.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200606/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Few vets will make trip to commemorate Dday

Despite the lack of international crowds, David Pottier still went out to raise American
flags in the Calvados village of Mosles, population 356, which was liberated by Allied
troops the day after the landing on five Normandy beachheads.

In a forlorn scene, a gardener tended to the parched grass around the small monument for
the war dead, while Pottier, the local mayor, was getting the French tricolor to flutter next
to the Stars and Stripes.

“We have to recognize that they came to die in a foreign land,” Pottier said. “We miss the
GIS,” he said of the U.S. soldiers.

The pandemic has wreaked havoc across the world, infecting 6.6 million people, killing
over 391,000 and devastating economies. It poses a particular threat to the elderly — like
the surviving Dday veterans who are in their late 90s or older.

It has also affected the younger generations who turn out every year to mark the occasion.
Most have been barred from traveling to the windswept coasts of Normandy.

Some 160,000 soldiers made the perilous crossing from England that day in atrocious con-
ditions, storming dunes that they knew were heavily defended by German troops deter-
mined to hold their positions.

Somehow, they succeeded. Yet they left a trail of thousands of casualties who have been
mourned for generations.

Last year stood out, with U.S. President Donald Trump joining French President Emmanuel
Macron at the American cemetery in CollevillesurMer, on a bluff overlooking Omaha
Beach. All across Normandy’s beaches, tens of thousands came from across the globe to
pay their respects to the dead and laud the surviving soldiers.

The acrid smell of wartimeera jeep exhaust fumes and the rumble of old tanks filled the air
as parades of vintage vehicles went from village to village. The tiny roads between the
dunes, hedges and apple orchards were clogged for hours, if not days.

Heading into the Dday remembrance weekend this year, only the salty brine coming off the
ocean on Omaha Beach hits the nostrils, the shrieks of seagulls pierce the ears and a sense
of desolation hangs across the region’s country roads.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200606/page/1/textview 2/2
