2020. 6. 17. Boxing icon Curtis Cokes

Boxing icon Curtis Cokes
Gifted Cokes used elusiveness to win welterweight title

The Dallas Morning News - 30 May 2020 - 1A - By KEVIN SHERRINGTON Staff Writer ksherrington@dallasnews.com

Curtis Cokes, Dallas’ first world champion and the undisputed soul of the city’s boxing
scene, died Friday at 82.

 

Curtis Cokes, Dallas’ first world champion and the undisputed soul of the city’s boxing
scene for more than a halfcentury, died Friday of heart failure at 82.

Cokes had been in hospice for a week, said Erwin “Sparky” Sparks, his partner at the Home
of Champions gym.

Back in the day before titles were divided and subdivided, Cokes held the world welter-
weight title from 196669. Quincy Taylor, who trained under Cokes, and Desoto’s Errol
Spence are the only Dallasarea boxers to win world titles since.

Inducted into the International Boxing Hall of Fame in 2003, Cokes, a classic counter-
puncher at 58, 147 pounds, wasn’t wildly popular among fight fans because he wasn’t a
brawler. That was by design.

“The name of the sport is boxing, not fighting,” Cokes told The Dallas Morning News in
2013. “You can play football, you can play basketball, but you can’t play boxing. It’s serious
business where you can get hurt every time you step into the ring.

“Tt’s an art to hit and not be hit.”

Artist or not, Cokes could hit.

“He wanted the other guy

to make a mistake,” said Steve Crosson, a longtime ring official. “And when he unloaded
that right hand, he was devastating.”

Cokes came of age in an era when black fighters weren’t allowed to compete in Golden
Gloves. His progress also was likely hindered by the fact that he didn’t work under a world-
class trainer or promoter.

Cokes got by on his natural athleticism — he was allstate in basketball as well as baseball
at Booker T. Washington, played shortstop on a traveling semipro baseball team and once
got a tryout with the Dodgers — and his intuitive ring smarts.

Fighting primarily at the old Sportatorium or Memorial Auditorium, Cokes worked his way
up the ladder slowly. He had 27 bouts in Texas, including one in Mexico, before earning a
spot on a bigtime card. He lost to Luis Rodriguez but gained a fan in Rodriguez’s trainer,

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200530/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Boxing icon Curtis Cokes

Angelo Dundee, who also worked with a young heavyweight named Cassius Clay. Dundee
told Cokes he’d like to train him, too, but he’d have to move to Miami. Cokes would also
receive invitations to train in St. Louis, Houston and Los Angeles. He remained in his
hometown instead.

On Aug. 24, 1966, he finally got his big chance: a unanimous 15round decision over Manny
Gonzalez for the vacant World Boxing Association welterweight title. He added the World
Boxing Council title three months later when he won a 15round unanimous decision over
France’s Jean Josselin at Memorial Auditorium.

Nearly 50 years after the fact, Dickie Cole, who refereed Cokes’ win, called the night of Nov.
28, 1966, “maybe the most memorable in Dallas’ boxing history.”

“Curtis wasn’t a punk kid who won the title,” Cole told The News in 2013. “He was almost
30 years old and had paid his dues. He struggled to get there. Dallas never did him any fa-
vors. And there he was with that hammer he had for a right hand, winning as our cham-
pion.”

Only 6,000 showed up at Memorial Auditorium to see the hometown champ add another
belt. The city’s ruling class was slow to embrace its first world champ. Only after the inter-
vention of the Dallas Cowboys and the team’s black players in particular did the city fete
Cokes with a parade.

“Tf he had been white,” former Cowboy Willie Townes told The News in 1987, “I’m sure he
would have been the toast of the town.”

Cokes fought 13 times while he held the title before losing to Jose Napoles at the Forum in
Los Angeles on April 18, 1969. His right eye closed, Cokes was unable to get up for the bell
for the 14th round. He lost the rematch, too.

“He didn’t whip me so good the first time,” Cokes joked to Laurence Cole, “so I went back
for seconds.”

Laurence Cole, Dickie’s son, trained under Cokes before embarking on a career as a world-
class referee.

“He was a Classy man,” Laurence Cole said. “Look at the times he grew through, what he
struggled through, yet he was never bitter.”

Said Crosson: “He was always a consummate gentleman, without ego. Just a very fine per-
son.”

Cokes went 62144, according to boxrec.com. Once his career was over, Cokes trained many
young fighters at his gym, including Kirk Johnson, a Canadian heavyweight who chal-
lenged for the WBA title in 2002. Cokes even owned a Dallas nightclub. But financial prob-
lems plagued him. The Internal Revenue Service once confiscated his entire purse, $11,000,
to pay back taxes. Near the end of a career that covered 80 fights, he filed for bankruptcy.
He took it all in stride, including the slights, and said he had no regrets.

“T have done things my way my whole life because that’s the way it had to be,” he said in
2013. “On the other hand, I never had to take orders from anyone. “And I think I’ve put up
a good fight.” Cokes is survived by two brothers, Joe and Robert, a sister, Mary Helen
Cokes, and five children. Funeral services are pending.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200530/page/1/textview 2/2
