2020. 6. 17. BLACK MEMBERS

BLACK MEMBERS

of Congress from Texas are calling for systemic change following a week of
protests.

The Dallas Morning News - 2 Jun 2020 - 1A - By PAUL COBLER Washington Bureau paul.cobler@dallasnews.com EDDIE
BERNICE JOHNSON Twitter: @Paulcobler

WASHINGTON — Black members of Congress from Texas are calling for systemic change
following a week of protests triggered by the death of George Floyd, a black man who died
after a Minneapolis police officer held him on the ground and pressed a knee in his neck for
nearly nine minutes.

 

se «
Ff

“What we’re seeing now is unfortunately so ingrained in our culture as it relates to polic-
ing and policing in black communities,” Rep. Marc Veasey, Dfort Worth, said Monday af-
ternoon in a call with other Dallasarea officials.

‘A lot of those stereotypes, we know they’re part of society in general. Unfortunately with
police officers, they have a greater responsibility to not act out on these things and make
sure they don’t happen in their police departments.”

Veasey urged action by elected officials at all levels of government to address police bru-
tality and urged legislation that would demilitarize police forces.

Protests that began in Minneapolis have spread to more than 100 other cities around the
country, escalating over the weekend with violent clashes between police and protesters in
New York, Atlanta, Los Angeles, Atlanta and a number of Texas cities, including Dallas,
Austin, San Antonio and Houston.

Rep. Eddie Bernice Johnson, Ddallas, called both for peaceful demonstrations and swift
prosecution of the four officers involved in Floyd’s death, tweeting Monday that African
Americans “want, deserve, and demand justice.”

At the same time, she condemned rioting and looting.

“Let’s be clear — there is a distinct difference between protestors and rioters,” she wrote.
“Protestors seek justice and meaningful change, while rioters seek opportunities to dam-
age and destroy.”

The protests ignited last week in Minneapolis after video footage of Floyd’s death was
posted online, showing him beg for air as Minneapolis police officer Derek Chauvin
pressed his knee into his neck.

Three other officers looked on. All four were fired the next day, but only Chauvin has been
charged with any crime so far. He was arrested Friday and charged with thirddegree mur-
der and manslaughter.

Rep. Colin Allred, Ddallas, also condemned rioting, writing Sunday that the violence
“should not drown out the message of the many who are in pain.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200602/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. BLACK MEMBERS

Allred continued that repeated killings of black people at the hands of police and systemic
racism have created an atmosphere of grief in Dallas.

[Dallas] has always been a city with vastly different outcomes based on where you live and
what you look like,” he wrote. “That history is still very much with us, and it is something
we have to acknowledge if we are going to deliver real, equitable change.”

Even before Floyd’s death, tensions have flared with a series of attacks on lawabiding black
Americans, by fellow citizens or police.

Two white men were arrested in May for the February shooting death of Anmaud Arbery,
who’d been out for a jog in southern Georgia. In Louisville, Ky., police shot and killed Bre-
onna Taylor on March 13 after breaking down her door as part of an investigation into two
men suspected of selling drugs at a house far from her apartment. She was a 26yearold
emergency room technician.

Demonstrations quickly spread to the rest of the country throughout the past week, peak-
ing during the weekend with tens of thousands of demonstrators taking to city streets.
Rep. Will Hurd, the only black Republican in the U.S. House, condemned the pace at which
the police involved with Floyd’s death were being prosecuted.

The San Antonioarea congressman called Friday for the immediate arrest of all four offi-
cers at the scene, adding on Twitter that it “shouldn’t take days to arrest offenders in-
volved in heinous crimes caught on tape.”

“Communities across this country are hurting because black men shouldn’t die in police
custody,” he wrote. “If someone isn’t fighting arrest, you do not use force. The only thing
that will relieve a small piece of that hurt is justice.”

Later that day, after Chauvin was arrested, Hurd demanded an investigation into the
former officer’s record. In 18 years with the Minneapolis

Police Department, he was the subject of 18 complaints.

In Houston, where Floyd grew up and where he will be buried, Democratic Rep. Sheila
Jackson Lee joined protesters marching on Saturday to call for prosecution of the officers
involved in his death.

The 70yearold congresswoman joined members of Floyd’s family at a news conference
where she called for action from Congress, including legislation that would provide incen-
tives and accreditation for reform in police departments.

Fellow Houston Democrat Rep. Al Green has made similar demands.

“We declared a war on poverty. We declared a war on drugs. Why not declare a war on
racism?” Green said during a speech on the House floor last week.

“Why not decide that here and now we are not going to allow racism in this country to the
extent that people lose their lives?”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200602/page/1/textview 2/2
