2020. 6. 17. City approves climate plan

City approves climate plan

Plan focuses on 8 key issues; mayor calls it ‘a balanced and commonsense
approach’

The Dallas Morning News - 28 May 2020 - 1A - By JESUS JIMENEZ Staff Writer jesus.jimenez@dallasnews.com

The Dallas council unanimously approved the city’s first climate action, aimed at making
Dallas more sustainable and mitigating the effects of climate change.

Tn
MEET YOUR
SL

 

The Dallas City Council on Wednesday unanimously approved the city’s first climate ac-
tion, aimed at making Dallas more sustainable and mitigating the effects of climate
change.

“This plan takes a balanced and commonsense approach — one that sets ambitious goals
but also accounts for our economic needs,” Dallas Mayor Eric Johnson said at a news con-
ference Wednesday afternoon. “We all live in and share this environment, and it’s up to us
to be good stewards.”

With more than 90 action items, the plan addresses eight issues: energyefficient and cli-
materesilient buildings, renewable and affordable energy, transportation, waste, water re-
sources, green spaces, food and clean air.

Many of the plan’s proposals focus on reducing greenhouse gases to set the city on a path
to reaching its boldest goal — carbon neutrality by 2050.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200528/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. City approves climate plan

“This has been a long journey,” said council] member Omar Narvaez of District 6, chairman
of the Environment and Sustainability Committee, of the plan, which has been in the
works for more than a year.

The plan, officially dubbed the Comprehensive Environmental and Climate Action Plan, is
the product of hundreds of community meetings that drew more than 9,000 suggestions
from residents.

During Wednesday’s council meeting, Johnson talked about the importance of environ-
mental issues as he recalled being tested for lead poisoning when he

was younger because he grew up near a leadsmelting plant in West Dallas.

“T think everyone should be able to relate to the idea of wanting to preserve our environ-
ment for our future for generations,” Johnson said. “I think we can turn the environment
issue into a mainstream issue and get everyday folks talking about it.”

The plan has the potential to change how Dallas residents drive to work, power their
homes, and the quality of the air they breathe. Of the plan’s 97 action items, 19 address
transportation, the largest category.

Some of the plan’s most notable goals include: Making all new construction in the city
“netzero energy” buildings within 10 years. (The term means that the amount of energy
used by a building is equal to the amount of renewable energy produced there.) The plan
aims for 50% of Dallas residents and businesses to enroll in renewable electric plans by
2050. Under the plan, all DART buses and Dallas school buses purchased after 2030 will be
fully electric.

Some goals won’t be as visible every day — such as the reduction of waste and water con-
sumption per capita. But others will be very noticeable, such as the goal for the city’s tree
canopy to cover at least 40% of Dallas by 2050 and a target for 95% of the population to
live within a mile walk to a park or trail by 2050.

The plan also aims to reduce the urban heat island index by 75% by the middle of the cen-
tury.

While it will be years before the city sees the full effects of the plan, Narvaez said he hopes
Dallas can set an example for other cities across the country.

“What starts here today in Dallas changes the world,” Narvaez said.

The plan drew support from several organizations across the state, including the Texas
Trees Foundation, the Dallas Sierra Club, the Nature

Conservancy in Texas, Children’s Health System, Parkland Health & Hospital System, the
Dallas Regional Chamber, and others.

Still before the plan went to a vote, dozens of Dallas residents voiced their thoughts about
it, including some who feel it does not go far enough.

“T want you to all commit to stronger action,” resident Molly Beyer said during Wednes-
day’s council meeting.

Others like resident Valerie Plese called the plan “very weak.”

Narvaez admitted more can be done, but called the plan a “roadmap” for the city.

“This is a plan to move us forward. The plan is not perfect. The plan is full of compro-
mise,” Narvaez said.

“Trust me, I would have loved to have gone further.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200528/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. City approves climate plan

Johnson said he was not surprised to hear some residents believed the plan didn’t address
enough, and others think the plan goes too far.
“It’s probably the sign of a good deal,” Johnson said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200528/page/1/textview 3/3
