2020. 6. 17. Maryland voting

Maryland voting

People wait in line well after polls’ closing time to cast ballots in primary
election

The Washington Post : 3 Jun 2020 - A1 - BY PAUL SCHWARTZMAN, JENNA PORTNOY AND LAUREN LUMPKIN

In a primary meant to have little in-person voting, long lines kept voters at polls well after

 

is a:
Ee cae: VOte F

Former mayor Sheila Dixon (D) had a modest lead in the Democratic primary to become
this weary city’s next mayor, according to a preliminary tally of mail-in ballots received by
Monday night.

By 11:20 p.m. Tuesday, when the Board of Elections posted the early results, Dixon had 30
percent of the votes, slightly ahead of City Council President Brandon Scott (D).

Mary Miller, a former Obama administration official, and Thiru Vignarajah, a former
prosecutor, trailed them but were ahead of the rest of the crowded field.

The initial tally was released shortly after polls closed on a night when people waited in
line for hours to cast ballots in a primary election that was supposed to minimize in-per-
son voting, to limit the spread of the novel coronavirus.

But thousands lined up at some of the few live voting sites Tuesday evening, and their vot-
ing proceeded slowly, in part because of social distancing restrictions. Crowds of voters
also arrived at specially designated drop-off points to leave mail-in ballots at the last
minute — only to encounter packed parking lots that prevented them from reaching the
boxes before the 8 p.m. deadline, election watchdogs said.

“There are so many things to fix before November,” said Joanne Antoine, executive direc-
tor of Common Cause Maryland. She was referring to the upcoming presidential general
election, when turnout will be far greater but in-person voting will likely be limited be-
cause of the coronavirus pandemic.

Ballots were mailed to all of the state’s 3.5 million registered voters, officials said,
although at least 1 million of those ballots were delayed, and many voters reported not re-
ceiving their ballots at all.

As of Monday, about 835,000 completed ballots had been returned, state data showed. In
coming days, officials will count any ballots postmarked by Tuesday.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200603/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Maryland voting

One of the most-watched contests was Baltimore’s Democratic mayoral primary, a
crowded race that is certain to determine who takes over a city reeling from the pandemic,
corruption scandals and long-standing gun violence.

Voters across Maryland were also selecting presidential nominees and nominees for
Congress, state judgeships, and school board.

Rep. Kweisi Mfume (D), who in April won a special election to serve out the remainder of
the late representative Elijah E. Cummings’s term, was expected to win the nomination to
represent the Baltimore-based 7th Congressional District.

His opponents in the crowded contest included Cummings’s widow, Maya Rockeymoore
Cummings.

With registered Democrats far outnumbering Republicans in Baltimore, the winner of that
contest — and the mayoral nominating race — will be heavily favored in the general elec-
tion.

The field of mayoral candidates — a mix of long-established Democrats and newcomers
— included Dixon, a former mayor who resigned a decade ago after pleading guilty to em-
bezzling gift cards intended for the poor.

For months, Dixon was at the top of polls as she appealed to older African American voters
who value her governmental experience and recall the crime reductions that occurred
when she was in office.

Yet many voters also rejected the prospect of Dixon’s return to power because of her past
transgression. In 2016, she lost a first comeback bid to then State Sen. Catherine Pugh, who
became mayor. A year ago, Pugh (D) resigned after using a series of self-published chil-
dren's’ books to commit what prosecutors said was $800,000 in fraud.

“Win or lose, I’m at peace with myself,” Dixon told reporters as she awaited results.
“When I started this campaign, I said it was in God’s hands and the voters’.”

The most recent Baltimore Sun poll suggested that voters had not coalesced around one
candidate. The other top Democratic contenders include the current mayor, Bernard C.
“Jack” Young, City Council President Scott, former prosecutor Vignarajah, and former
Treasury Department official Miller, who poured more than $2 million of her own money
into the race.

Neither Vignarajah or Miller have held elected office.

Matthew Crenson, a retired Johns Hopkins political science professor, said the next mayor
is facing the potential for huge budget deficits, rising unemployment, and an electorate
that is wary of its elected leaders.

“It’s a pivotal election because of the state of the economy,” Crenson said. “It’s going to
be a mess.”

In recent years, Baltimore endured an unceasing toll of gun violence and the 2015 riots,
which started after Freddie Gray, 25, died of a spinal-cord injury he suffered in police cus-
tody. Since 2014, the city’s population has declined by 30,000, falling below 600,000 for
the first time in a century.

At Edmondson-westside High School on Tuesday, Kaman Abdullah, 58, said he was sup-
porting Dixon.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200603/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Maryland voting

“We know people done did a lot worse,” Abdullah, 58, who is self-employed, said of the
circumstances surrounding Dixon’s resignation in 2010. “When she was the mayor, she
was doing a lot for the city. We didn’t have a whole lot of trash in the city. She was looking
out for the elderly.”

Brittany Ballentine, 26, a professional dancer and personal trainer, said the city needs a
new generation of leadership, which was why she was supporting Scott. “He graduated
from Baltimore City Public Schools, so that speaks volumes to me,” she said.

As they waited to vote at a polling station in West Baltimore, Phyllis Wert, 62, and Kim
Bangs, 61, said they both planned to support Miller. “I think we need a change,” said Wert,
who, with Bangs, owns a Baltimorebased wine company.

The women said Miller could use her financial expertise to help rejuvenate a city that is
sure to experience fiscal tumult because of the pandemic. Besides working for the Treasury
Department during the Obama administration, Miller spent nearly three decades at T.
Rowe Price, the investment management firm.

“After [covid-19], we’re going to need a real boost to the economy,” Wert said. “Asa
smallbusiness owner, we’re going to need all the help we can get.”

Democrats were also voting in the presidential primary, with presumptive nominee and
former vice president Joe Biden the only viable candidate still in the race.

All eight of Maryland’s seats in the U.S. House of Representatives were also on the ballot.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200603/page/1/textview 3/3
