2020. 6. 17. Team sports struggle to find a way back

Team sports struggle to fiind a way back
Texas players aren’t the fiorst young people to ever demand change

The Dallas Morning News - 14 Jun 2020 - 1A: Earl Campbell: Yards After Contact, Twitter: @KSherringtonDMN

The return of professional team sports in this country is running into roadblocks, Tim
Cowlishaw writes.

Al

Back in the day while playing Trivial Pursuit with a couple of recent college grads, one of
the kids complained about the fairness of a question from the yellowwedge category. The
incident in question, she argued, took place before she was even born.

Yes, I told her, history is like that. The world didn’t start with you, no matter what your
parents say.

Used to be you couldn’t hold a kid to anything that happened before Friday night. Most
couldn’t tell you antebellum from Auntie Mame. But they’re catching up now, and witha
vengeance, you might say.

College athletes all over the nation — and in particular down in Austin — are flush with
information about the occasionally troublesome traditions on their campuses. As a result,
they’re demanding to be heard. And if they’re not, Longhorn football players say, they
won’t take part in rituals that help make Texas the nation’s richest football program.
Some of the demands are easy enough to accommodate. Got a building named after Robert
Lee Moore, a math professor and segregationist who for years denied black students entry
to his classes? Seems like a nobrainer to me. Besides, wiping his name off the building
could afford school officials fresh naming rights on a campus that’s more landlocked by
the day.

Before they announce any new titles, though, they might want to check the bona fides of
the bidders, just in case. Hate to have to do this all over again in another hundred years.
Some of the players’ other demands are more problematic. Especially for Texas alums and
donors attached to “The Eyes of Texas,” the school spirit song. The problem isn’t neces
sarily the lyrics, though there’s a wink at Robert E. Lee’s admonishment about the “eyes of
the South.” At issue is the song’s birth in an early2othcentury minstrel show performed in
blackface.

Let me first say that, as a Houston alum, I’ve got no dog in this hunt. Maybe that’s why it’s
easier to see both sides. At the very least, players shouldn’t be required to sing it if they
find it offensive. It’s also worthy of discussion among players and school officials, as
Texas’ athletic director, Chris Del Conte, has acknowledged.

All those who responded in anger to the players’ protests might do well to pause to con-
sider that it could have been worse. Players asked that some facet of RoyalMemorial Sta-
dium be named after Julius Whittier, the Longhorns’ first black football player. What they
didn’t ask is that Darrell Royal’s name be removed, along with his likeness out front.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 4/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Team sports struggle to find a way back

Royal was agonizingly slow to integrate his football program, and though he no doubt met
resistance from regents and boosters in the ’60s, it’s clear he didn’t use his considerable
clout to force the issue, either. By 1963, he owned Texas’ only national football title. Who
would have denied him then if it meant he’d leave if he didn’t get what he wanted? Imagine
if Royal had been as bold as Hayden Fry, who told SMU officials before he took the job in
1962 that he wouldn’t come unless he could integrate the football program. And all he had
on his résumé at the time was a couple of stops as an assistant at Baylor and Arkansas. The
difference in priorities is why Royal may be the greatest college football coach in the
state’s glorious history, but Fry remains the most important.

For the record, Royal came to regret that he didn’t stand on his principles sooner. Asher
Price’s book,

spells out how gregarious Ken Dabbs sold the Tyler Rose on Texas, not Royal. Black fami-
lies were well aware of Royal’s history. He’d famously passed on Jerry LeVias. Told Dabbs
in ’66 when he suggested the talents of Elmo Wright for Texas, “Unfortunately, at this
stage of the game, we’re not ready to take that step.”

Of course, you say, all that was a halfcentury ago and times have changed. Not as much as
you think, probably. Anyway, the point here is not to make a case that Royal was a racist,
only that for too long he came down on the wrong side of history. Something for the rest of
us to remember in times like these.

As for what’s next in the crosshairs of studentathletes, who knows? One of these days it’ 1]
occur to someone that half of Mount Rushmore is populated by former slaveholders.

Now, I’m not saying we should reflexively trash our history or the icons served up to us all
those years in school. Far from it. Perspective is important. But it should all be fair game
for discussion. If our current condition has taught us anything, it’s that an open account-
ing of the facts is necessary in all facets of our lives.

Meanwhile, try to be a little more openminded when it comes to kids these days. Some of
you grew up in the tempestuous ’60s and were shaped by them. Or should have been.
Maybe you’ve forgotten. Fortunately, we live in an era when you can look up anything, as
some of us are just now finding out.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200614/page/1/textview 2/2
