2020. 6. 17. Unemployment: Payments fall behind as states root out fraud.

Unemployment: Payments fall behind as states root out
fraud.

The Washington Post : 13 Jun 2020 - Ai - BY TONY ROMM tony.romm@washpost.com

State and federal investigators are scrambling to stop scammers from stealing millions of
dollars in unemployment benefits, imposing a raft of new restrictions that have inadver-
tently deprived some out-of-work Americans from receiving much-needed payments for
weeks.

rs
poze
x '

TT

   

The broad, national crackdowns began in May, following reports that organized criminals
had set their sights on local labor agencies at a moment when they’re trying to manage the
worst economic crisis since the Great Depression. States including Maine, Michigan,
Pennsylvania and Washington each have reviewed scores of past applications, while halt-
ing some current unemployment payments, hoping to thwart fraudsters before they could
sap any more funds.

The aggressive actions have helped some of these states identify tens of thousands of sus-
picious claims filed by alleged criminals, many of whom had relied on personal informa-
tion stolen from unsuspecting workers to obtain benefits they were not eligible to receive.
But these states’ aggressive interventions have also swept up many people who have noth-
ing to do with the scams. Some out-ofwork Americans who had properly filed for help —
and weathered long delays to obtain checks in the first place — have been baffled and frus-
trated to find their benefits are now unexpectedly paused.

“They said benefits would only be stopped for few days, but it’s been weeks,” lamented
John Tirpak, executive director of the Unemployment Law Project. His nonprofit advocates
for workers in Washington, one of the states hit hardest by fraud.

For Karen Womack, her first unemployment check arrived in April, and not a moment too
soon. The 49-year-old Tukwila, Wash., resident had bills to pay, a family to support and
bigger dreams to chase — a plan to move her husband, son and granddaughter out of the
one-bedroom unit in an extended-stay hotel where they had been living for years.

In May, though, an ominous notice arrived from the state, asking Womack to verify her
identity. She did as she was told, submitting her identification and Social Security cards to

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200613/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. Unemployment: Payments fall behind as states root out fraud.

Washington officials. But the state’s unemployment office has cut off her jobless aid any-
way, leaving her with no cash — and no answers — for the past four weeks.

“T understand they’re going through a fraud situation,” said Womack, who worked for 20
years at T-mobile Park, the home of the Seattle Mariners baseball team, recently serving in
a supervisory role before the novel coronavirus took hold. “But that doesn’t pay my bills.”
Washington officials estimate that fraudsters may have stolen up to $650 million from
their unemployment insurance system. The state has been able to recapture about half of
those dollars, said Suzi Levine, the commissioner for Washington’s Employment Security
Department, but she still acknowledged the hardship their anti-fraud efforts have inad-
vertently created for some local families.

“We know that people are hurting, and we’ re doing everything we can to quickly resolve
these identity cases and make sure legitimate claimants get their benefits,” she said.

The troubles surfacing in Washington state and around the country illustrate the unavoid-
able consequences of a pandemic that abruptly shuttered businesses and threw tens of
millions of Americans out of work. Never before have so many people flooded their local
labor agencies seeking financial help at the same time. And never before have states faced
such pressure to dispatch their aid so quickly.

Another 1.5 million people applied for unemployment last week, bringing the 12-week to-
tal during the coronavirus pandemic to 44 million, the Labor Department said Thursday.
Earlier in the pandemic, a flood of cash-starved applicants overwhelmed states’ creaky
computer systems and jammed their phone lines. Years of neglect — and technology in
some cases that was nearly half a century old — resulted in some Americans waiting
months just to collect their first unemployment payments.

Adding to the burdens, the $2 trillion Cares Act adopted by Congress introduced a host of
new programs that states had to rush to implement in the face of crushing demand. Their
tasks included the launch of a new safetynet program covering workers for Uber, Lyft and
other gig-economy companies, as well as a new mandate to send an extra $600 in aid pay-
ments to all Americans until the end of July.

“The problem is every state is overwhelmed,” said Michele Evermore, a senior policy ana-
lyst at the National Employment Law Project, which advocates for unemployment in-
surance programs. Amid the influx of claims, she said “funding has actually decreased” for
state unemployment offices over the past 20 years.

States had started clearing some of their backlogs when the first signs of fraud emerged in
May. A bulletin circulated by the U.S. Secret Service indicated Washington and six other
states had fallen victim to a “largescale” criminal operation believed to have originated in
Nigeria. The scammers often seized on stolen information — allegedly derived from past
public data breaches — to impersonate government personnel, first responders and school
employees, and collect unearned benefits in their names, U.S. officials said.

The Secret Service initially indicated Florida, North Carolina, Massachusetts, Rhode Is-
land, Oklahoma and Wyoming had been targeted in the scheme, but its May 14 bulletin
concluded with a wider warning: “It is extremely likely every state is vulnerable to this
scheme and will be targeted if they have not already.” The Secret Service did not respond
to requests for comment.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200613/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. Unemployment: Payments fall behind as states root out fraud.

States soon rushed to adopt a wave of measures meant to scrutinize new unemployment
insurance claims more closely and vet those they already paid, hoping to cut off the fraud
before it could metastasize. Many states required their residents to submit new documen-
tation to prove their identities, at times pausing benefits until they completed the process.
Maine, for example, put in place a 48- to 72-hour delay last week on paying out benefits to
take a closer look at its applications. In doing so, state officials said they have canceled
more than 12,000 new claims, and over 16,000 weekly certifications to obtain checks, be-
lieving them to be fraudulent, according to data released June 4.

In Pennsylvania, meanwhile, local leaders in late May said they would be following up with
a wide array of workers who obtained money under the Cares Act after the state “discov-
ered attempts by scammers to try and bilk COVID-19 unemployment benefits.” The state
had not been among the initial hot spots flagged in the Secret Service’s alert last month.
In total, the state has halted 58,000 claims for review, the “majority” of which “have been
verified as authentic,” said Penny Ickes, the communications director for the state’s
Department of Labor & Industry. “We are still working with state and federal partners to
investigate the remaining claims.”

The wide-ranging, still-evolving scams have troubled federal officials, who predicted in
recent months that fraud targeting unemployment insurance could total $26 billion na-
tionwide. Scott Dahl, the inspector general for the Labor Department, delivered his own
sobering assessment in written remarks filed ahead of a congressional hearing Tuesday.
The watchdog’s office alone is actively probing 400 matters related to jobless benefits, he
said, adding they “expect that number to rise.”

But some states’ crackdowns still have troubled labor advocates, who point to the fact that
out-of-work Americans already had to navigate a complex, bureaucratic and lengthy
process just to get checks in the first place — and now face the prospect of significant de-
lays once again.

“It’s affected people who are already getting aid, and affected people whose claims still
haven’t been processed yet,” said Rachael Kohl, the director of the University of Michigan
Workers’ Rights Clinic.

Michigan officials recently said they had stopped payments on 340,000 active claims, to-
taling 20 percent of all unemployment claims filed in the state, pending further review. Jeff
Donofrio, the director of the Michigan Department of Labor and Economic Opportunity,
said at a news conference that some of the claims may have been filed fraudulently using
personal information stolen from past security breaches targeting organizations such as
Equifax. The 2017 security lapse at the credit-reporting bureau affected more than 140
million Americans, whose names, addresses and Social Security numbers were exposed.
Still, Donofrio acknowledged some innocent Michiganders may face delays and other hur-
dles as a result of the state’s investigation. “Unfortunately, many of these are legitimate
claimants whose economic lifeline is now tied up due to this criminal scheme,” he said at
the public event.

The state comment.

In Washington, officials last month began reviewing 190,000 claims for suspicious activ-
ity, said Levine, the director of the state’s unemployment agency. They have resolved more

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200613/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. Unemployment: Payments fall behind as states root out fraud.

than half of their investigations, she said, and so far clawed back more than $300 million
in erroneous payments.

But unsuspecting, innocent Washington residents — many out of work since the pandemic
first took hold in March — say they have been caught in the fray, too.

In Renton, a suburb of Seattle, Lucia Flugencio already had been struggling to receive her
first unemployment check. Her war over paperwork began in March, after she was laid off
from her job overseeing some retail stores and restaurants at the Seattle-tacoma Interna-
tional Airport.

Then, last month, Flugencio received a request to substantiate her identification. The note
led the 28-year-old to believe she had been swept up in Washington’s anti-fraud review.
She submitted the documentation, yet weeks later, said she hasn’t heard a word.
Washington officials stress they have taken great pains to minimize the disruption to le-
gitimate applicants. They must tend to an array of victims that includes unsuspecting state
residents who may not even realize their personal information is in the hands of hackers
and fraudsters who sought to obtain benefits on their behalf.

But the state itself further added to the headaches when it for a time sought to collect sen-
sitive data by email, a security risk in its own right. Levine said the state is now directing
people to submit documentation through a secure portal.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200613/page/1/textview 4/4
