2020. 6. 17. Book shows Texas Rangers’ dark side

Book shows Texas Rangers’ dark side

The Texas Rangers didn’t invent police brutality, says the author of a new book.
‘They perfected it.’

The Dallas Morning News : 14 Jun 2020 - 1A. MICHAEL GRANBERRY mgranberry@dallasnews.com

In anew book, author Doug J. Swanson examines the Texas Rangers’ history of racism and brutality.
They didn’t invent police brutality, the author says, “they perfected it.”

 

Doug J. Swanson’s new book has arrived at an extraordinary time in American history, only shortly
after the killing of George Floyd in Minneapolis.

Floyd died May 25 in police custody after a white officer pinned him to the ground with a knee to his
neck. His death ignited large protests across the country.

Swanson’s new book is Cult of Glory: The Bold and

Brutal History of the Texas Rangers, which highlights the 1oman volunteer squad raised in 1823 to
protect the first American settlers in the Mexican territory of Texas. The Rangers, in Swanson’s
words, “functioned as executioners” whose “job was to seize and hold Texas for the white man.”

In the same way that author Gerald Posner’s latest book, Pharma, arrived on March 10, three days
before the coronavirus provoked a national emergency, and with one of its chapters titled “The
Coming Pandemic,” Swanson sees Cult of Glory as being “very timely.” Eerily so.

“The nation reels anew,” Swanson says from his home in Pittsburgh, where the 34year veteran of
The

Dallas Morning News now teaches writing at the University of Pittsburgh.

“But it’s an old story: White police officers killing men and women of color. Some of the very worst
of it happened a little over 100 years ago, along the TexasMexico border. There, the Texas Rangers —

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 4/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. Book shows Texas Rangers’ dark side

the vaunted official force of the Lone Star State — didn’t invent police brutality. But they perfected it.
Operating as what we would now term death squads, they executed hundreds, perhaps thousands, of
Mexicans and Mexican Americans.

“Some of those killed were bandits who attacked whiteowned farms and ranches. But many of the
dead had committed no crimes. They were guilty only of having brown skin. Or they lived on land
that white ranchers wanted to steal. The Rangers obliged by beating and shooting them.”

Swanson’s book has already had an impact in Dallas: A statue at Dallas Love Field of a captain in the
Texas Rangers was removed June 4 as a result of Swanson’s book. The statue, which is in storage for
now, depicts Capt. Jay Banks, “the Ranger in charge when thenTexas Gov. Allan Shivers sent the
Rangers to block integration of a high school in Mansfield and a community college in Texarkana in
1957,” Swanson says. Shivers, a strict segregationist, defied a court order and dispatched the
Rangers to Mansfield “to arrest any black kids who tried to enroll.”

Swanson, 67, a native of Tampa, Fla., moved to Dallas with his family when he was 16. He was
thrilled. Compared to Tampa, Dallas was bright lights, big city.

He calls himself a “proud graduate” of Woodrow Wilson High School, where he fondly remembers
the football team that played in the state semifinals in 1969, propelled by running back John Paul
McCrumbly, who later played for Texas A&M University and the Buffalo Bills of the NFL.

T.S. Eliot once said, “Between the idea and the reality falls the shadow.” And so it was for Swanson,
who'd read a story in Texas Monthly in 1994 that caused a light to go on. Titled “The Twilight of the
Texas Rangers,” it gave birth to an idea that lingered in his head for years. Finally, it left the shadows
and became reality when Viking, his publisher, urged him to do “a big Texas book.”

Sure, the Rangers had been written about before, but no one had published a tome about the agency’s
nearly 200 years, much less one that took a harrowing deep dive into the Rangers’ darkest moments.
“Walter Prescott Webb’s book, which was published in 1935, is generally seen as the classic Rangers
HISTORIAN ROBERT M. UTLEY “REALLY TOOK A SOFT APPROACH. I STARTED LOOKING AT SOME
OF THE RANGERS’ LEGENDS, AND THEY REALLY FELL APART.” DOUG J. SWANSON

book,” Swanson says of The Texas Rangers: A Century of Frontier Defense, “but he was quite
friendly to the Rangers.”

Historian Robert M. Utley “published a twovolume history in the early 2000s, but Utley, as distin-
guished as he is,” Swanson says, “really took a soft approach. I started looking at some of the
Rangers’ legends, and they really fell apart.”

One example involves Rangers icon James Callahan, who’d been lionized in previous books, Swanson
says, “for going after Indians who'd been marauding into Texas” in the 1800s. Swanson interviewed
dozens of people, but where the story began to emerge was in the “thousands and thousands” of
pages he pored over in state archives and museums.

“1 badly underestimated how many records I needed to go through,” he says, noting that instead of
taking the anticipated two years to finish the

book, it took five. Cult of Glory is the second work of nonfiction for an author who has published five
novels. His previous book, Blood Aces: The Wild Ride of Benny Binion, the Texas Gangster Who
Created Vegas Poker, was published in 2014 and is being developed as a cable television series.

What Swanson discovered during his Rangers research is that Callahan, for one, symbolized the line
between myth and reality that permeates Rangers folklore. Instead of being a hero commended for
protecting citizens from lawless invaders, what Callahan did, most infamously, Swanson says, was
chase down runaway slaves. He then seized them and sold them.

Years after his death, Callahan has had his reputation polished to a spitshine by Rangers mytholo-
gists, who Swanson contends are masters of revisionist history.

“That was the first one I really started digging into,” he says, uncovering multiple examples that
showed the real story to be “far richer than anyone had shown.” The pattern, he says, revealed itself

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200614/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. Book shows Texas Rangers’ dark side

“again and again and again,” all but screaming at him that “this is what the book should be about.”
A character widely celebrated in the Rangers’ folklore is Stephen F. Austin, heralded for almost two
centuries as the father of Texas.

Austin is credited, in historical records, for having also founded the Rangers. What’s more precise,
Swanson says, is that Austin helped establish the “protoRangers,” an armed delegation of 10 men
appointed to wipe out the Karankawa Indians. The 10 are often hailed as “the first Rangers — in
1823,” Swanson says.

Recent history has not been kind to the record they left behind. One of the exhibits at the new Dallas
Holocaust and Human Rights Museum that documents human rights abuses shows how Austin, with
the help of the Rangers, wiped out the Karankawa people.

The Karankawas were a threat — by standing in the way of an expanding white population that cov-
eted the land on which they were living.

What Swanson found in his thousands of documents is that the history of the Rangers is hardly a
pretty picture when it comes to documenting their treatment of people of color.

Even then, he concedes, the history of the Rangers is not without its legitimate high points.

“They helped pacify an extraordinarily wild and savage place: Texas. Criminals were rampant across
frontier Texas. They helped bring them to justice. Rangers were really valuable scouts and guerrilla
fighters in the Mexican war. At the same time, however, they were committing horrible atrocities in
the Mexican war.”

Also, the modern Rangers have “done some really good stuff,” Swanson says, solving scores of
highprofile cases “and providing valuable service to smalltown departments. They helped break the
Texas Youth Commission sexualabuse scandal. They brought a murdering priest to justice. They’ve
done extraordinarily strong work on cold cases. So, yes, they’ve done a lot. Texas would not be the
same without them. There’s no doubt about that. And they are deeply woven into the history of the
state.”

Swanson compares their reputation to that of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police or even Scotland
Yard. They have been celebrated in movies and television series, including Chuck Norris’ role in the
longrunning, locally produced CBS drama

Walker, Texas Ranger.

Even the North Texas entry in Major League Baseball is the Texas Rangers, and before they became
the Dallas Cowboys, the region’s NFL franchise flirted with the notion of calling themselves the Dal-
las Rangers. In Larry McMurtry’s Pulitzer Prizewinning novel, Lonesome Dove, his pair of colorful
protagonists are former Texas Rangers. But in another McMurtry novel, All My Friends

Are Going to Be Strangers, hero Danny Deck is, in Swanson’s recap, “driving down a dirt road in the
Texas outback where he’s accosted by Texas Rangers, who start making fun of his long hair. They
grab him and heave him into a cactus patch.”

Asked for comment about Swanson’s book and the removal of the statue, the Texas Rangers issued a
statement to The Dallas Morning News on Friday:

“The department is aware of Mr. Swanson’s book, and we also know that the city of Dallas elected to
remove a Texas Ranger statue from Love Field, which they have the authority to do. We can tell you
that today, more than ever, we remain committed to the mission of protecting and serving the com-
munity and people of Dallas, and Texans everywhere.”

The Danny Deck story speaks to the underbelly of the Rangers’ history, the darkness that reveals it-
self as often as the light and which serves as the underpinning of Swanson’s book.

Part of that history includes 1919, when the Rangers, Swanson says, “actively conspired to run the
NAACP out of Texas, to quash the civil rights of black Americans.”

Part of that history shows how the Rangers took the easy way out and “sat on evidence” that would
have exposed professed serial killer Henry Lee Lucas as a pathological liar, as someone who could

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200614/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. Book shows Texas Rangers’ dark side

not possibly have committed “the dozens of crimes he confessed to.”

Part of that history shows the ugliness of how the Rangers acted as “agents of the white, empowered
class. If a white rancher in South Texas wanted to steal some Tejano land, they would bring in the
Rangers to kick the Tejanos off of it.”

Part of that history reveals the Rangers as agents of racism in aiding the efforts of thenTexas Gov.
Shivers. In many such cases, Swanson says, the Rangers were “just following orders. I’m not saying
the Rangers were intrinsically evil. But they were agents of the people pulling the levers of power,
who were white guys.”

Part of that history unmasks a law enforcement agency that was willing to ignore, from the Civil War
to the 1930s, those who committed murder in the form of lynching.

Part of that history reveals the truism that, while “similar agencies exist in other states, none of
them have been around as long as the Rangers, and none of them, I believe, have the reputation of
the Rangers.”

“There’s nobody,” Swanson says with a sigh, “like the Texas Rangers.”

“THEY HELPED PACIFY AN EXTRAORDINARILY WILD AND SAVAGE PLACE: TEXAS.” DOUG J.
SWANSON

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200614/page/1/textview 4/4
