2020. 6. 17. Louisville: Protest turns violent, leaving seven people shot.

Louisville: Protest turns violent, leaving seven people shot.

The Washington Post - 30 May 2020 - A1 - BY AVA WALLACE AND ROMAN STUBBS ava.wallace@washpost.com ro-
man.stubbs@washpost.com Josh Wood contributed to this report.

louisville — The night had started as a peaceful demonstration, with chants of “no justice,
no peace,” and shouts of Breonna Taylor’s name — one of a string of deaths of unarmed
African Americans that has drawn national attention in recent weeks.

  

It ended in chaos, with seven people wounded by gunfire that city officials said originated
in the crowd and spurred police dressed in riot gear to engage with protesters. The shoot-
ing victims were in stable or good condition Friday.

Taylor, a 26-year-old emergency medical technician, was sleeping in the middle of the
night on March 13 when police entered her home to execute a no-knock drug warrant. Her
boyfriend, thinking the police were armed intruders, fired a gun; police returned fire and
Taylor was shot eight times. She died at the scene.

No drugs were found, according to a lawsuit filed by Taylor’s family, which accuses offi-
cers of wrongful death, excessive force and gross negligence. The FBI is investigating.
Thursday night’s protests in Louisville represented a tipping point for many in a city that
residents say is not prone to widespread demonstrations of this sort — the last protest in
Louisville close to Thursday’s scale were deadly race riots in 1968. But in the wake of Tay-
lor’s death and the more recent deaths of Ahmaud Arbery in Brunswick, Ga., and George
Floyd in Minneapolis, black and white Louisvillians took to the streets Thursday.

Only three out of an estimated 600 demonstrators were arrested, but there was significant
destruction downtown. Windows were broken on government buildings, garbage cans
were hoisted atop cars and the right hand was torn off a statue of Louis XVI near City Hall.
Protesters, exhausted by the coronavirus pandemic, were desperate to speak out against
police brutality. Members of the city’s black community wanted to demonstrate their
long-simmering distrust of local police.

“Tt’s like things are coming to a head, it’s almost collecting nationwide, and I think that
kind of amped up Louisville protesters,” said Haven Harrington, a community organizer
on the city’s west side. “Normally, people in Louisville don’t protest quite like this, to this
scale. All these [deaths] happened back-to-backto-back. The country as a whole is
charged.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200530/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Louisville: Protest turns violent, leaving seven people shot.

It was just after 2 a.m. Friday when Jasmine Harris finally returned to her apartment on the
west side of Louisville, where her three children were already asleep. Her voice was hoarse.
Her face burned from tear gas. Her right leg and arm bore welts from two rubber bullets
that had hit her just a couple hours before, when Harris joined hundreds downtown in the
protest.

Harris, a 27-year-old activist, tried to process the events of the night as she poured milk
over her face and slipped into a hot bath with Epsom salts added to soothe her bruises. By
the time she climbed into bed at 4 a.m., she resolved to protest again Friday night. This
time, she would wear long sleeves and bring milk and water.

“This was my wake-up Harris said.

Thursday’s protest took place downtown, just a few blocks east of what locals call the
Ninth Street divide, the corridor that demarcates the largely African American communi-
ties in west Louisville from the largely white neighborhoods in the rest of the city.

It’s where many of the city’s hospitals and government buildings are clustered along with
hotels and the University of Louisville’s basketball arena, the KFC Yum! Center, where
Thursday night police engaged with protesters.

Around 10:30 p.m., gunshots rang out in the crowd and seven people were wounded. Police
sprayed tear gas and rubber bullets, according to multiple witnesses.

In a news conference Friday morning, Mayor Greg Fischer said five of the shooting victims
were in good condition and two others, who were sent to surgery, were in stable condition.
Lavita Chavous, assistant chief of police in the Louisville Metro Police Department, said
two police officers were taken to the hospital with conditions “spurred by the events.”
Fischer denounced the violence Friday but called for peaceful protests and acknowledged
demonstrators’ concerns, indefinitely suspending no-knock warrants.

In the months following Taylor’s death, Fischer’s administration handed the police’s in-
ternal probe of the shooting over to Kentucky’s attorney general and sent the findings to
the U.S. attorney’s office and the FBI, which has since opened its own investigation.
“These changes and more to come — we’re not done — should signal that I hear the com-
munity. ... Breonna Taylor’s name and her story will now be part of our city’s history. But
as Breonna’s family shared last night,” Fischer said, referencing a video message from
Taylor’s sister, “answering violence with violence only makes things worse.”

Still, many in Louisville’s black community vowed to gather again Friday, with hopes of a
more peaceful protest.

Walt Smith, a 34-year-old West Louisville resident, saw the destruction of Thursday
night’s gathering when he ventured out to survey the aftermath early Friday morning.
There was nobody left in the streets. He saw busted windows on the city’s correctional fa-
cility. He saw graffiti on walls and trash littered strewn across the ground.

“This is the response you get when there is no justice happening,” Smith said.

Early Friday evening, dozens of protesters returned to the intersection that saw the tear
gas confrontation with police.

Dino Johnson, 52, was protesting for the second night and said the reforms the city has so
far made do not go far enough.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200530/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Louisville: Protest turns violent, leaving seven people shot.

“There need to be arrests. There needs to be some justice,” he said. “When you commit a
crime as a civilian, you have to face the consequences. Just because you wear a blue uni-
form, you still should have to face the consequences.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200530/page/1/textview 3/3
