2020. 6. 17. Battle lines drawn over Confederate symbols

Battle lines drawn over Confederate symbols
Trump vows to keep names of 10 Army bases in the South

The Dallas Morning News - 11 Jun 2020: 1A - By TODD J. GILLMAN Washington Bureau tgillman@dallasnews.com

WASHINGTON — President Donald Trump, overruling his own Pentagon chief, declared
Wednesday that he will not entertain the idea of removing the names of Confederate gen-
erals such as Robert E. Lee from 10 Army posts, including Fort Hood in Texas, the nation’s
largest military installation.

   

FORT He
=Home of <%a

    
  

“That is an absolute nonstarter for the president,” White House press secretary Kayleigh
Mcenany told reporters.

“Fort Bragg, for instance, is known for the heroes within it, that train there, that deployed
from there. And it’s an insult to say to the men and women who left there — the last thing
they saw on American soil before go

ing overseas, and in some cases losing their lives — to tell them that what they left was in-
herently a racist institution because of a name. That’s unacceptable to the president, and
rightfully so,” she said.

The announcement comes just two days after the Pentagon abandoned decades of resis-
tance, with Defense Secretary Mark Esper and Army Secretary Ryan Mccarthy saying they
are “open to a bipartisan discussion on the topic” — a shift welcomed by civil rights advo-
cates.

Demonstrations against police brutality have rocked U.S. cities for two weeks that
prompted Trump to insist on a military response to protests around the country. After ini-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 1/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Battle lines drawn over Confederate symbols

tially backing the president, Esper publicly distanced himself from his plan to invoke an
1807 law allowing a president to use federal troops to put down insurrection.

Trump views such independence as disloyalty. The swift public rebuke of Esper follows a
familiar pattern when cabinet members cross him: humiliation signaling a chill that
sometimes ends in a firing.

Mcenany said the president would veto any legislation to change the names of these in-
stallations.

Within two hours, NASCAR banned the display of Confederate flags at its races, saying it
“runs contrary to our commitment to providing a welcoming and inclusive environment.”
Banned symbols

Three months ago, the Marine Corps banned Confederate symbols as part of an effort to
root out white supremacy in the ranks and to end ongoing offense to black personnel.
Pressure has built on the military, and on states and cities, since the May 25 death of Ge-
orge Floyd in Minneapolis, where a police officer pinned Floyd’s neck to the ground with
his knee for nearly nine minutes.

Fort Hood, the largest U.S. military installation in the world, is named for Gen. John Bell
Hood. He graduated from West Point, where the U.S. Army trains future officers and where
Trump will deliver a commencement address on Saturday.

When Hood’s home state, Kentucky, declared itself neutral during the Civil War, he moved
to Texas and took command of the Confederacy’s Texas Brigade.

“Gen. Hood was a traitor, one of the worst generals in the Civil War,” Domingo Garcia, a
Dallas lawyer who serves as president of the League of United Latin American Citizens, told
The Dallas Morning News on Tuesday. “That was a shameful episode in American history
in terms of the Confederacy and what it stood for.

LULAC has been pressing to rename Fort Hood for Sgt. Roy Benavidez, a legendary Mexi-
can American Green Beret who survived an especially rough battle during the Vietnam War
in 1968, saving eight comrades despite heavy enemy fire and his own severe injuries. Pres-
ident Ronald Reagan awarded him a Medal of Honor in 1981.

Retired Army general and former CIA director David Petraeus, writing Tuesday in The At-
lantic, embraced the move to abandon “legacies of systemic racism” by stripping the Con-
federates’ names off the forts.

“We do not live in a country to which Braxton Bragg, Henry L. Benning, or Robert E. Lee
can serve as an inspiration,” he wrote. “The way we resolve these issues will define our
national identity for this century and beyond.”

NASCAR

The issue has become a cultural and political flashpoint.

At the Sons of Confederate Veterans, commanderinchief, Paul Gramling, a retired postal
worker from Shreveport, La., was pleased at Trump’s decision.

“These bases were named for these generals out of respect and the kind of military men
they were,” he said. “I’m glad to see that President Trump still shows that respect.”

As for NASCAR’S decision, he said, “There’s no way they can make NASCAR a sport for
everyone if you’re going to turn around and slap the face of the people who got you where
you are.... When you’re dealing with Southerners who are conservative minded, politically

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 1/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Battle lines drawn over Confederate symbols

correct actions will not get you anywhere .... Right now the fad is to destroy everything
Confederate, and American.”

Ancestry

Trump also cited the importance of “heritage,” a term invoked by Southerners who defend
the right to commemorate their ancestry.

“These monumental and very powerful bases have become part of a great American her-
itage and a history of winning victory, and freedom,” Trump said on Twitter, a statement
his press secretary read at her briefing. “The United States of America trained and de-
ployed our heroes here and won two world wars. My administration will not even consider
the renaming of these magnificent and fabled military installations. Our history as the
greatest nation in the world will not be tampered with. Respect our military!”

In 2017, clashes between white supremacists and counterprotesters in Charlottesville, Va.,
sparked a similar national conversation about monuments, schools and military bases
named for Confederate heroes.

Fort Hood, near Killeen, opened in 1942. It’s home to III Corps and roughly 40,000 sol-
diers. After showing skills earlier in the war, Hood lost 26,000 men in late 1864 in a pair of
bungled assaults and was removed as commander of the Army of Tennessee in short order.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 1/page/1/textview 3/3
