2020. 6. 17. The region: Northern Virginia is set to reopen further on Friday.

The region: Northern Virginia is set to reopen further on Fri-
day.

State’s schools to reopen in fall if progress on virus holds, Northam says

The Washington Post - 10 Jun 2020 - A1 - BY PATRICIA SULLIVAN, DANA HEDGPETH AND LAUREN LUMPKIN

Northern Virginia and Richmond will move to the next phase of shutdown recovery start-
ing Friday, Gov. Ralph Northam announced, as data shows the novel coronavirus appears
to be slowing its spread across the region.

  

The looser restrictions include opening restaurants for indoor dining at half capacity and
allowing gyms and fitness centers to reopen indoors at 30 percent capacity. Most of Vir-
ginia entered Phase 2 earlier this month, but Northern Virginia and Richmond were
granted delays because they had been hit harder by the pandemic.

In addition, Northam (D) said Virginia students will return to school in the fall if the state
continues to limit the spread of the virus.

State leaders explained a threepart schools reopening plan that matches the phases
Northam has put in place to reopen the economy. While the plan offers guidance, school
systems and private schools have flexibility to tailor their own plans, which then must be
submitted for approval.

“All Virginia schools will open for students next year, but the

school experience will look very different,” Northam said. “These phases will allow in-
person instruction, but slowly.”

Phase 2 of the education reopening plan allows for in-person teaching for prekindergarten
through third-grade students, students with disabilities and students who are not fluent in
English. Strict social distancing protocols must be enforced; on school buses, just one child
may be assigned to each seat, Northam said.

School assemblies and other large gatherings are limited to 50 people; school clubs and
extracurricular activities may be reinstated as long as students follow social distancing
guidelines. Studentathletes are permitted to resume practices, so long as they keep 10 feet
away from one another and disinfect shared equipment, such as helmets and uniforms,
between uses.

While the entire state will be in Phase 2 by Friday, Northam said the school year is already
over, so no classes will resume. He said schools may launch summer school or school-
based camps if they adhere to the restrictions.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200610/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. The region: Northern Virginia is set to reopen further on Friday.

The final stage — Phase 3 — will invite all students back to school, with social distancing
measures in place. Students and teachers who are at a higher risk of getting sick may con-
tinue remotely. Teachers and staff members must wear face coverings if they are in prox-
imity to others; students will be encouraged to do so.

Northam sounded confident the state will be in Phase 3 in time for school to open, but offi-
cials said that will depend on current favorable trends continuing. Local schools may im-
pose tighter restrictions if they need to.

The announcements came as the owner of a Loudoun County winery and wedding venue
and the owner of a Fredericksburg restaurant sued Northam in state and federal court to
try to force him to more completely reopen the state for business.

The plaintiffs — represented by state Sen. Chap Petersen (D-fairfax City), who is an attor-
ney — allege that Northam did not rely on medical or scientific evidence to prove the shut-
down was necessary. Petersen also called for the General Assembly to have a say in the or-
ders.

“We can’t just have government by fiat,” Petersen said at a news conference in front of the
state Supreme Court.

Jon B. Tigges, owner of the 24acre Zion Springs winery and bedand-breakfast, said his
business saw the cancellation of 16 weddings this spring and summer, eliminating more
than half his total expected annual revenue.

Linda Park, owner of the hibachi-style Japanese restaurant Fujiya House, said she has been
unable to reopen under the state’s strict social distancing restrictions, because food is not
prepared in a kitchen, but at the customers’ tables.

Their lawsuits are not the first to challenge Northam’s orders. A gun shop owner in Lynch-
burg won an injunction in April allowing the shop to reopen. Two Republican lawmakers
challenged the shutdown orders on behalf of Gold’s Gym, but a judge turned down their
request for an injunction allowing the gyms to reopen. A church in Chincoteague fought
the ban on gatherings of more than 10 people.

Virginia, Maryland and the District reported 1,072 new coronavirus infections on Tuesday,
but the number of people hospitalized remained below 200 and the rolling seven-day av-
erage of newly reported deaths remained below 70.

Both statistics indicate a gradual slowdown in the severity of the pandemic after months of
widespread shutdowns and social distancing restrictions.

The region saw 58 new deaths reported, bringing the death toll for Virginia, Maryland and
the District to 4,802.

In the District, there were 85 new cases and four new deaths.

In Virginia, there were 487 new cases and 19 new deaths. Fairfax, which has been hit hard
by the virus, saw an uptick of 92 new cases, bringing its total to 12,695.

In Maryland, there were 500 new cases and 35 new deaths reported. Montgomery County
reported 150 new cases and eight deaths, and Prince George’s reported 113 new cases and
five deaths.

Montgomery County entered Maryland’s Phase 1 reopening on June 1. County Health Offi-
cer Travis Gayles said the county will wait until at least June 15 to determine whether there
have been consistent declines over 14 days that would warrant the further easing of re-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200610/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. The region: Northern Virginia is set to reopen further on Friday.

strictions. The county’s coronavirus dashboard has not yet been reset to track the progress
since June 1.

“We're moving toward the right direction, but, again, what we’re looking for is sustained
improvements,” Gayles said.

Among the most positive indicators is the decrease in the county’s test positivity rate,
which is about 9 percent as of Tuesday, down from a high of 30 percent at the peak of the
crisis.

Acute care bed utilization rate is the indicator that has been “holding us back,” said County
Council member Andrew Friedson (D-district 1), with the number of beds in use falling be-
low 70 percent only four times in the past two weeks.

Gayles said this is partly because covid-19 patients often need to convalesce over a long
period. So even though the county’s caseload growth is slowing, many patients still need
acute care.

On Monday, Baltimore Mayor Bernard C. “Jack” Young (D) signed an executive order
launching the Phase 1 reopening in his city. It is the last jurisdiction in Maryland to do so.
The Phase 1 reopening allows for barbershops and hair salons to reopen by appointment
with up to five people inside; permits churches to hold tented outdoor services with 50
people in attendance; and reopens restaurants for outdoor meals, summer camps with up
to 10 people per room for indoor activities and hotels with appropriate safeguards in place.
“We can’t just have a government by fiat.” Virginia state Sen. Chap Petersen (D-fairfax
City), who called for the General Assembly to have a say in the coronarvirus shutdown or-
ders

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200610/page/1/textview 3/3
