2020. 6. 17. 328 new cases in Dallas County

328 new cases in Dallas County

New cases set another record as tallies also rise in hospitals, ICUS and
emergency rooms

The Dallas Morning News - 13 Jun 2020 - 1A - By ARIA JONES Staff Writer aria.jones@dallasnews.com

Dallas County reported 328 new coronavirus cases Friday, setting a daily record for the
third consecutive day, as well as three more deaths. Tarrant County reported 296 new
cases and one more death.

 
    
   

———
COVID

TESTING

Dallas County reported 328 new coronavirus cases Friday, setting a daily record for the
third consecutive day.

The county also reported three more deaths from the virus: three men, all in their 60s,
from Garland, Irving and Richardson.

There have been 13,585 cases of COVID19 and 280 deaths in Dallas County, which does not
report a number of recoveries.

County Judge Clay Jenkins noted at a news conference that, with the political season and
other activities gearing back up, people may want to take their minds off the pandemic.
“This disease doesn’t care that we’re tired,” Jenkins said. “It doesn’t care that we’re dis-
tracted. It doesn’t care that we have other priorities.”

County officials and health experts have focused on hospitalizations, ICU admissions

and emergency room visits to determine guidelines for everyday activities during the pan-
demic — and those numbers are the highest they’ve been since the pandemic began, Dr.
Philip Huang, the county’s health director, said at the news conference.

“These are not the directions we want to go,” he said.

For the third day in a row, Dallas County reported that more than 370 people were in hos-
pitals with the coronavirus. Hospitalizations for the virus had stayed between 300 and 350
for several weeks.

Huang said the reason the county hasn’t used the rate of positive tests as a key indicator to
monitor the spread of the virus is that it can be inconsistent. He said hospitals change their
testing policies, all the nursing homes are now undergoing testing, and rural communities
without cases also are being tested.

“So, you’re really diluting some of those numbers,” he said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 3/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. 328 new cases in Dallas County

Asked what the county was doing to address the fact that Hispanic people account for more
than 60% of its cases, Huang said COVID19 information is being translated into Spanish
and officials are doing community outreach to educate people in ZIP codes with higher
case counts.

Jenkins said the number of cases among Hispanics is disproportionate because they were
more likely to be essential workers when the state began reopening and less likely to have
access to health care.

Jenkins said that for the county to get through the pandemic and get the economy moving,
the community needs to take precautions and follow public health guidelines — such as
wearing a mask, staying 6 feet apart in public and practicing good hygiene.

“Tf we fail to do that, we will see a wave of new cases, and that will be crippling for both
public health and consumer confidence,” he said.

Jenkins said two new testing sites at Walmarts would open in the next week: at 2650 State
Highway 161 in Grand Prairie, from 7 to 9 a.m. Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays; and at
915 N. Town East Blvd. in Mesquite on Tuesdays and Thursdays. Hours for the Town East
location weren’t available.

Jenkins said people don’t need to be symptomatic to get tested if they attended a mass
gathering five or more days ago. He said people don’t have to specify that it was a protest
— church gatherings and political rallies also count.

He also announced new guidelines for people with highrisk conditions and for apartment
complexes.

The guidance for people who are most vulnerable — those 65 or older or with chronic
health conditions or who live in long termcare facilities — includes traveling only for es-
sential needs, working from home when possible and avoiding physical interactions out-
side the home.

For apartment complexes, the county recommendations include closing amenities, regu-
larly cleaning frequently touched and hightraffic areas and requiring masks in common
areas.

Jenkins said he was meeting with a committee of experts Friday night to create recom-
mendations for what Gov. Greg Abbott should monitor to slow the spread of the disease.
“T think it’s hard,” Jenkins said. “The politicians have made it really clear, President
Trump’s made it really clear that it’s fullsteam ahead on opening the economy regardless
of what they see.”

Tarrant County

Tarrant County reported 296 cases Friday and one death — a Fort Worth man in his 70s
who had underlying health conditions. Tarrant County has had 7,120 cases and 191 deaths.
It also reported 115 recoveries, raising the total to 3,053.

Collin County

As of Friday, Collin County had seven cases, 212 new recoveries and no additional deaths,
according to data from the Texas Department of State Health Services.

The county has had a total of 1,560 cases, 37 deaths and 1,271 recoveries.

Denton County

Denton County reported 55 cases and 42 recoveries Friday.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 3/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. 328 new cases in Dallas County

The county has seen a total of 1,687 cases, 36 deaths and 936 recoveries.

Rockwall County

On Friday, Rockwall County reported three cases.

The county now has 233 confirmed cases. There have been 15 deaths — all among residents
of the Broadmoor Medical Lodge in Rockwall.

County officials said previously that they did not receive an update on recoveries from the
state this week because of a change in reporting.

Kaufman County

Kaufman County officials reported 10 cases Friday.

The county has had 325 cases of COVID19 and two deaths, along with 258 recoveries.

Ellis County

Ellis County reported 19 cases Friday, as well as three new recoveries from the virus.

The county now has had a total of 463 cases, with 338 recoveries and 18 deaths.

Johnson County

The county reported 10 new cases Friday. Four people were released from isolation, for a
total of 175. The county has had 256 cases of COVID19 and four deaths.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 3/page/1/textview 3/3
