2020. 6. 17. DFW busiest airport in May

DFW busiest airport in May

Hub recorded 12,132 floights for the month, 3,500 more than secondbusiest
airport

The Dallas Morning News - 6 Jun 2020 - 1A - By KYLE ARNOLD Siaff Writer kyle.arnold@dallasnews.com

Flights and passengers were down substantially at DFW International Airport in May, but

 

major travel hubs that have downsized during the COVID19 pandemic.

DFW, still running a fraction of the flights it did a few months ago, operated 12,132 of them
in May, far ahead of the No. 2 airport, Chicago O’hare, ac

cording to the aviation data company OAG. O’hare, the biggest hub for Chicagobased
United Airlines, had 8,596 flights, OAG said.

“Although we have no passenger numbers, I suspect that it was also the busiest from a
passenger number given the large differential,” said OAG senior analyst John Grant.

For DFW, it’s been a matter of shrinking less than other airports have. In February, before
the CO

VID19 pandemic starting hitting the U.S. air industry hard, DFW Airport had about 26,000
landing and departing flights, behind both Atlanta Hartsfieldjackson International Airport
and Chicago O’hare.

Almost all of DFW’S traffic is thanks to Fort Worthbased American Airlines, which oper-
ated 11,109 flights out of DFW in May, said American spokesman Ross Feinstein.

United and Atlantabased Delta have aggressively cut flight schedules to try to match dis-
mal demand across the country and the world as people

avoid flying to stop the spread of the coronavirus. American made cuts, too, but in many
ways that has only made DFW more crucial.

American and other airlines are running more flights through major hubs and cutting back
on point-to-point flying that made sense only when there were far more customers.
“There’s one thing which we can say without question is that coming out of this, DFW and
Charlotte will remain two of the three biggest hubs on earth,” American Airlines CEO Doug
Parker said last week during a call for an investors conference. “Having big hubs is going
to be as important as ever, no matter what might happen with demand.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200606/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. DFW busiest airport in May

American also announced Thursday that it would ramp up its schedules by 74% for July
compared with what it’s flying now after seeing an uptick in passengers during the last few
weeks. With that, American will be flying about 55% of the schedule for July that it had
planned before the pandemic hit.

DFW has been the world’s third or fourthlargest airport for the last few years, serving
more than 75 million passengers, or about 205,000 a day.

But it’s still quiet at the usually bustling airport. Airport Director Sean Donohue said that
in May, the airport saw about 25,000 passengers a day after seeing only 10,000 a day in
April.

Nationwide data from TSA shows that air travelers are coming back, though slowly.
Nearly all of the traffic at DFW is coming from domestic traffic. International demand for
travel is still down substantially, and analysts expect it to rebound much slower than de-
mand within the United States.

DFW has seen some uptick from other airlines. Qatar Airways has announced plans to in-
crease the number of flights it runs in July.

American plans to restart flights to Dublin in July.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200606/page/1/textview 2/2
