2020. 6. 17. 2.1 MILLION more lose jobs in U.S.

2.1 MILLION more lose jobs in U.S.

The Dallas Morning News - 29 May 2020 - 1A - By CHRISTOPHER RUGABER and DAN SEWELL

WASHINGTON — The coronavirus crisis threw at least 2.1 million Americans out of work
last week despite the gradual reopening of businesses around the country, stoking fears
Thursday that the scourge is doing deep and potentially longlasting damage to the U.S.
economy.

Texas jobless claims | U.S. jobless claims
Wen ending Wonk ancding

May 2%
21 million

May 25
128,105

500,000 & milton

 

250.0000

130, OOD

 

 

1 asi Oo

2 al I:
3 .

Syne

 

Wot naan ova, iy adetd
SOURCE | 5 ol ue

ih

 

thy

a

| Seasonally aolumhed

Seal Graphic

Most of the latest economic news from around the globe was likewise grim, as some of the
world’s most populous countries continued to report rising infections and deaths. The
confirmed U.S. death toll topped 100,000, the highest in the world, on Wednesday.

The latest jobloss figures from the U.S. Labor Department bring to 41 million the running
total of Americans who have filed for unemployment benefits since the shutdowns took
hold in midmarch.

There were some encouraging signs: The overall number of Americans currently drawing
jobless benefits dropped for the first time since the crisis began, from 25 million to 21 mil-
lion. And firsttime applications for unemployment have fallen for eight straight weeks, as
states gradually let stores, restaurants and other businesses reopen and the auto industry
starts up factories again.

But the number of U.S. workers filing for unemployment is still extraordinarily high by
historical standards, and that suggests businesses are failing or permanently downsizing,
not just laying off people until the crisis can pass, economists warn.

“That is the kind of economic destruction you cannot quickly put back in the bottle,” said
Adam Ozimek, chief economist at Upwork.

The U.S. unemployment rate was 14.7% in April, a level not seen since the Depression, and
many economists expect it will be near 20% in May.

The figures come amid an intensifying debate in Congress over whether to extend $600 in
extra weekly federal unemployment benefits, provided under rescue legislation passed in
March but set to expire July 31.

Democrats have proposed extending the payments, while Republicans have argued that
the extra money could discourage laidoff workers from returning to jobs that pay less than

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200529/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. 2.1 MILLION more lose jobs in U.S.

they are getting on unemployment.

Kelly Kelso, a 30yearold roadie from Nashville for the rock group Foreigner, got her first
unemployment check last week after more than eight weeks of waiting. She said she was
still receiving far less in benefits than the $1,250 per week or more that she made on tour.
Though she is reluctant to leave the music industry, she said, “I have a cosmetology li-
cense. If all else fails, I could go back to doing hair.”

Another looming storm cloud: Economists say the sharp loss of tax revenue for state and
local governments is likely to compound the damage by forcing more publicsector layoffs
in the coming weeks.

Economists say that many of the jobs lost are never coming back, and that doubledigit un-
employment could persist through 2021.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200529/page/1/textview 2/2
