2020. 6. 17. Marking Memorial Day is especially difficult for families who have lost service members to the virus.

Marking Memorial Day is especially difficult for families who
have lost service members to the virus.

Marking holiday difficult as pandemic devastates WWII, Vietnam service
members

The Dallas Morning News - 25 May 2020 - 1A - ByRJ. RICO

ATLANTA — One was a 94yearold veteran of World War II who was the first of his 11
brothers to enlist in the military. One was a Vietnam veteran who lost his leg overseas and
was always touched when people thanked him for his service. Another was drafted into the
military at 18 and was awarded a Purple Heart.

They are among the untold number of veterans who served and survived during times of
war only to die in recent weeks from the coronavirus.

This year’s Memorial Day will pay tribute not only to those who died on the battlefield but
also more recent fallen soldiers. And in a reminder of the way coronavirus has transformed
American lives and traditions, many of the usual Memorial Day gatherings have been ei-
ther canceled or curtailed — mindful of the pandemic that has already killed more than
90,000 people in the U.S.

It’s making the situation even more

painful for the relatives of those veterans who have died from the virus.

High toll on veterans

Robert Hopp was one of at least 79 residents of a veterans home in Paramus, N_J., to die
from COVID19, making the staterun facility one of the nation’s worst hot spots for the
virus.

He served 2/0 tours during 1

2 the Vietnam War and received a Purple Heart after he was hit with enemy fire while in a
helicopter. Everyone else on board the chopper died, but Hopp managed to climb into the
pilot’s seat and fly to safety.

After being hospitalized recently for diabetic complications, his health deteriorated
quickly and he died in April. He was 70 years old.

His family is at a loss about how they will mark the occasion.

“We couldn’t even have a funeral for him yet,” said stepson J.J. Braniahopp. “There’s not
really anything we can do right now. All we’ll probably do is talk about him, maybe go fora
walk out in the sun.”

The toll of the virus on military veterans has been particularly harsh. They are older, have
underlying health problems, and many reside in facilities that have been breeding grounds
for the disease.

According to the Department of Veterans Affairs, more than 1,000 veterans have been
killed by the coronavirus. That does not include hundreds more who have died in staterun
veterans homes, including hardhit facilities in New Jersey, Massachusetts and Louisiana.
Hard on families

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200525/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Marking Memorial Day is especially difficult for families who have lost service members to the virus.

“The last couple weeks have been hard,” said Neal Hebert, whose father died at a veterans
home in Reserve, La. “I’m an only child, and I’ll routinely have the impulse of going ‘Oh, I
need to call Dad and tell him this thing.’ And it hits me that I can’t do that.”

His father, Berlin Hebert Jr., lost a leg from a land mine during the Vietnam War. He rarely
talked about the war but made his son promise to never join the Army. It was only in recent
years that he became more proud of his service, after the widower moved to the Southeast
Louisiana Veterans home.

It was there where he would attend Veterans Day services and he felt people acknowledged
his time in the military, a gesture that moved him.

“Tt always made him Neal Hebert said.

In March, after learning that a resident in the home was positive for COVID19, Neal Hebert
became concerned about his 74yearold father’s safety. He was assured by a nurse that his
mobilityimpaired father had not been exposed to the virus. But within days, Berlin Hebert
was hospitalized with the telltale respiratory symptoms.

His condition quickly deteriorated and his son had to say goodbye to him over the phone,
his father too weak to say anything back.

The Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund traditionally holds a large ceremony in cry,”
Washington. This year, the organization decided to hold a virtual ceremony and share
video messages submitted by the loved ones of fallen troops.

Charles H.F. Davis III said Memorial Day has always had a special significance in his family
due to his relatives’ long history of serving. But this year, the pandemic has prevented the
aging and geographically scattered family from planning a specific observance to mark the
death of his stepgrandfather.

First of many to serve

Ben Davis Jr. was the first of 11 brothers to enlist in the U.S. military when he joined the
Navy in 1944 during World War II. Combined, the brothers would go on to serve 158 years
in the armed forces. Davis Jr. served in the Navy, U.S. Army Reserve and Alabama National
Guard. He later became a surgical assistant with the Tuskegee Veterans Hospital.

Davis Jr. died in April at the age of 94 after contracting the virus at the Bill Nichols State
Veterans Home in Alexander City, Ala., his stepgrandson said.

Davis III, an assistant professor at the University of Southern California, said his grandfa-
ther’s death is especially gnawing because he was a black veteran and the virus has had an
inordinate impact on minority communities.

“Elders hold a special significance, especially in black communities,” said Davis III. “Not
being able to pay them the proper reverence and homage has been really difficult.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200525/page/1/textview 2/2
