2020. 6. 17. An emotional final goodbye

An emotional final goodbye

The Washington Post - 10 Jun 2020 - A1 - BY ARELIS R. HERNANDEZ, BRITTNEY MARTIN, MARISA IATI AND
LATESHIA BEACHUM arelis.hernandez@washpost.com marisa.iati@washpost.com lateshia.beachum@washpost.com lati
and Beachum reported from Washington. Michael Brice-saddler in Washington contributed to th

Crowds watch Tuesday as the funeral procession for George Floyd, whose casket was borne
by a horse-drawn carriage, travels the final mile to Houston Memorial Gardens in Pear-
land, Tex., where Floyd was laid to rest two weeks after his death at the hands of police in
Minneapolis.

 

HOUSTON — George Perry Floyd Jr. was buried next to his mother here on Tuesday, taking
his final resting place in the city where he was raised. It marked the end of his body’s
physical journey after his killing at the hands of police on a Minneapolis street corner two
weeks earlier, but it also signaled the acceleration of a movement for social justice that will
forever bear his name.

The final words in tribute to the 46-year-old father, friend and brother were a recommit-
ment by those who knew him — and now millions who know of him — to turn against
racism. Speaker after speaker at his funeral Tuesday afternoon implored America to move
from indifference to healing, from fear to courage and from mistrust to unity. They want
to ensure Floyd’s life was not lost in vain.

He was laid in a gold casket, celebrated and remembered by elected leaders, celebrities, ac-
tivists and Floyd’s family, who all wore white as they eulogized him. Stories about his life
growing up in Houston intertwined with rebukes of the attitudes and policies that facili-
tated his slaying, a nine-minute slow-motion death with a police officer’s knee on the
back of his neck.

Floyd was the oldest of five siblings, and his family begged of the world just one thing:
“Fight for my brother.”

If the past two weeks are any indication, that fight has been taken up by countless Ameri-
cans, as protests spread from the streets of Minneapolis to cities across the country and
even the globe. Demonstrators of all kinds have implored a rebirth of the Black Lives Mat-
ter movement and a reckoning of how police treat black citizens, with some cities promis-
ing to overhaul — or even disband — their police departments.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200610/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. An emotional final goodbye

Houston Mayor Sylvester Turner declared Tuesday “George ‘Perry’ Day” and announced
that he would sign an executive order banning police chokeholds and requiring city offi-
cers to de-escalate confrontations and exhaust all alternatives before using their guns.
Turner said Floyd gave his final breaths so that others won’t endure the same fate.

“The rest of us will now be able to breathe,” Turner said.

The world knows Floyd because of the video that depicts his brutal death and spawned col-
lective heartache. But on Tuesday, his aunt, Kathleen Mcgee, remembered him as a “pesky
little rascal,” who grew up in Houston’s Third Ward, a rapidly gentrifying neighborhood
that in Floyd’s day was plagued by the same systemic problems his death illuminated.
Floyd was born in Fayetteville, N.C., in 1973 to Larcenia Jones Floyd, affectionately known
as “Miss Cissy” when she came to live at Cuney Homes, a large brick-faced housing com-
plex in the heart of Houston’s Third Ward. She worked at a burger

stand nearby, Guidry’s, where Floyd would come often and snack on whatever food she
would surrender.

“Sometimes we’d just go through there and he’d go check on his mom and we would grab
a burger or fries and a drink or something,” said friend Herbert Mouton. “It was a simple
thing. Just going to check on his mom at work.”

But it was a habit born of the devotion Floyd practiced his entire life, checking in on the
people he loved. The tightknit

bonds between neighbors and friends, often forged in adversity, enveloped the budding
young man as he excelled in football and basketball at Jack Yates High School.

His classmates and Yates alumni held a candlelight vigil for him Monday night, and land-
marks across Texas’s largest cities lit up in the high school’s crimson and gold colors to
honor Floyd.

Floyd was the first in his family to graduate high school, and he went on to junior college
to play football but did not finish or earn a degree. Family members said he struggled for
years trying to find a job after running afoul of the law.

Moving to the Twin Cities in 2014 was an effort by Floyd — now a father of several chil-
dren, the youngest of whom former vice president Joe Biden addressed in his funeral mes-
sage — to steer his life in a new direction. But he was devastated when his mother died
some time later, friends said. Floyd’s autopsy noted that he had her name tattooed on his
torso.

Few Third Ward residents recognized it was Floyd in the video of his death. Craig Joseph’s
family owns the soul food restaurant Houston This is It, a few minutes’ walk from Cuney
Homes. Floyd, he said, was a “frequent flier” who came in often for the popular ox tail
meal or fried fish.

Joseph was sitting back in his chair watching CNN at home when he first saw the images of
Floyd’s death and sat up immediately. He was startled by the barbarism he witnessed, but
then he recognized why it had jolted him. His brother Gerald Side, who played football with
Floyd at Yates, squinted at the restaurant screens until he finally realized who it was.

“Oh man, Flo,” he recalled shaking his head. “He wouldn’t hurt a fly.”

Side wanted to come to the funeral but the fear that the novel coronavirus, which has dis-
proportionately harmed black communities, would be lurking kept him from joining the

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200610/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. An emotional final goodbye

crowds.

Hundreds of people filed into the private ceremony at Fountain of Praise Church, passing
by a bed of flower bouquets resting beneath a poster-size selfie of Floyd. Inside, a display
of white roses formed a heart, and blue flowers formed the letters, “BLM.”

Outside, small groups of people gathered to watch and talk. Navajo activist Nicole Walker
drove from New Mexico with her husband. Wrapping herself in a burial flag, she said she
felt kinship to Floyd’s family because of the racist indignities suffered by Native Ameri-
cans.

“It’s time for healing,” Walker said. “This is only the beginning.”

A day earlier, Pete and Christine Mayes of Sugarland, Tex., waited hours under a black
umbrella to walk past Floyd’s casket. Pete, who is black, said Floyd’s killing pushed him to
come out and say, “Enough is enough!”

His wife, Christine, who is white, said her family never talked about race growing up, so it
was never on her radar. It wasn’t until after she married Pete and Trayvon Martin was
killed in Florida, that she started to confront her unconscious biases. Now, she’s speaking
up.

“We have been quiet for too long,” she said. “We should’ve spoken up decades ago. I’m
ashamed that I’m just now finding my voice.”

Funeral speakers said Floyd’s death marked a breaking point, inspiring widespread
demonstrations and proclamations from leaders promising to change how the nation po-
lices itself. Americans, they said, are looking inward to transform sorrow into substantive
action.

“And until we know the price for black life is the same as the price for white life, we’re
gonna keep coming back to these situations over and over again,” the Rev. Al Sharpton
said during the service. “They never thought they’d see young whites marching like
they’re marching now. ... All over the world, I’ve seen grandchildren of slave masters
pulling down statues of slave masters. I’ve seen whites walking past curfews saying black
lives matter. God always uses unlikely people to do his will.”

Biden, the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee, directed part of his remarks to
Floyd’s 6-year-old daughter, Gianna. Too many black children like her have had to ask
what happened to their fathers, he said in a recorded message that was played during the
funeral.

“Why, in this nation, do black Americans wake up knowing they can lose their life just for
living their life?” Biden asked.

The Rev. William A. Lawson, pastor emeritus of Houston’s Wheeler Avenue Baptist Church,
drew parallels between the story of Jesus and Floyd, both of whom, he said, came from
humble beginnings and whose slayings changed the world.

“Can any good thing come out of a tragedy like this?” Lawson said. “His death did not
simply start a bunch of good speeches, a bunch of tributes. Out of his death has come a
movement, a worldwide movement.”

It is tragic that Floyd had to lose his life, said Omar Simmonds, 42, a flight attendant who
drove from Dallas to stand outside the funeral in temperatures that soared to nearly 100
degrees. But he said it was a sacrifice Floyd’s family made for him and his family.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200610/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. An emotional final goodbye

“We need a change, and I think that starts today,” he said. “I want to be a part of this.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200610/page/1/textview 4/4
