2020. 6. 18. Tribal gaming compacts get federal OK

Tribal gaming compacts get federal OK

New compacts would allow sports betting, casinos outside tribal jurisdic-
tions

The Oklahoman - 9 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Randy Ellis Staff writer rellis@oklahoman.com

Gov. Kevin Stitt's gaming compacts with the Comanche Nation and Otoe-Missouria Tribe
were granted f ederal approval Monday, prompting a strong rebuke from Oklahoma Attor-
ney General Mike Hunter.

“The Department of t he Interior' s thought less and irresponsible inaction on the comp
acts doesn' t change our conclusion that the governor lacks the authority to enter into
compacts that include activities not legal in Oklahoma,” Hunter said, referring to sports
betting and certain other forms of gambling he says are currently illegal under state law.
“The tribes cannot begin operating under the terms of these compacts until the many
questions that remain pending before the Oklahoma Supreme Court are resolved. Iam
deeply disappointed in Interior Secretary( David) Bernhardt' s abdication of his responsi-
bility to all of Oklahoma's Native American sovereigns, not just two.”

By“federal in action ,” Hunter was referring to the Interior Department's decision to let
the compacts take effect by failing to take specific action to approve or reject them within
45 days. When no action is taken, compacts are “deemed approved.” They then take effect
when they are published in the Federal Register, which must occur sometime within the
following 45 days.

Stitt and representatives of the two tribes issued statements Monday praising the federal
agency's decision.

“With these new gaming compacts, Oklahoma is ushering in a new era of prosperity,
opportunity, and partnership for the state and the tribes,” Stitt said.

The Comanche Nation and Otoe-Missouria Tribe issued a joint statement that said the In-
terior Department's decision means the compacts are “legal” and the tribes can begin op-
erating under the terms agreed to between the parties once the compacts are published in
the Federal Register.

“This compact represents the best of the Comanche people — being a good neighbor, re-
ciprocating back to our people and the communities in which we live; honoring the past
while looking ahead to a brighter future for all,” said Comanche Nation Chairman William
Nelson Sr. “We have known since we reached this agreement with the governor of Okla-
homa that our compact is legal and are pleased that the U.S. Department of the Interior has
agreed.”

“Today's approval of our compact with the state of Oklahoma will allow us to welcome in a
new, modern era of tribal gaming to the benefit of both our people and the state of Okla-
homa,” said OtoeMissouria Tribe Chairman John R. Shotton.

“This compact will help us further diversify our economy, bring in new revenue for ser-
vices for our people and will allow us to double down on our community engagement in
both our existing rural communities and future expansion opportunities. This compact is

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/20200609/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 18. Tribal gaming compacts get federal OK

what is best for our tribal members and we appreciate the Department of the Interior for
approving the compact today.”

The two tribal leaders' enthusiasm for the approval of the compacts was not shared by
John L. Berrey, chairman of the Quapaw Nation.

Berrey called the approval a“gut punch to tribes in Oklahoma and across t he country.”
“Today represents a new low-water mark for Indian gaming, and another page in the long
history of the federal government's disservice toward Indian people,” Berrey said .““Be-
cause Secretary Bernhardt failed to do his job, Gov. Stitt and other governors will now be
emboldened to make illegal demands of tribes when negotiating new gaming compacts.
The result in Oklahoma will be more litigation — and more damage to the relationship be-
tween tribal governments and the state.”

The new compacts contain controversial provisions that would authorize the tribes to con-
duct sports betting and authorize each tribe to build three casinos in counties outside their
traditional jurisdictions, if all other legal hurdles are eventually cleared.

“Now that the compacts are approved, we will evaluate our options moving forward on
sports betting,” Shotton said.

Hunter issued a legal opini on earlier that concluded Stitt exceeded his authority by autho-
rizing sports betting, which he said is not legal under Oklahoma law.

The governor's attorneys have argued the governor does have legal authority to approve
compacts that authorize sports betting, but have asked a federal judge to rule on the limits
of his authority.

Oklahoma legislative leaders have asked the Oklahoma Supreme Court to step in and de-
cide that issue, instead.

Neither the federal judge nor the Oklahoma Supreme Court have yet had time to render a
decision.

The Interior Department sent out a briefing statement Monday that said when compacts
are deemed approved, they are approved only to the extent that they comply with the In-
dian Gaming Regulatory Act, which leaves room for other issues to be fought in court.

“It's safe to say federal inaction won't settle these roiled waters,” said Stephen Greetham,
senior counsel for the Chickasaw Nation, which is one of the tribes that has challenged the
legality of the compacts.

Opinions differ greatly on what Monday's Department of Interior decision will mean for
tribal gaming in Oklahoma.

“This decision will have national ramifications as it reinforces tribal sovereignty and
moves Oklahoma away from a one-size-fits-all gaming compact, said Rob Rosette, attor-
ney for the Comanche Nation and Otoe-Missouria Tribe. “The Department of the Interior
rightly chose to uphold and respect the sovereignty of these two tribes, and we are confi-
dent the department will do the same for others going forward.”

However, Matthew L. Morgan, chairman of t he Oklahoma Indian Gaming Association, said
approval of the compacts will “introduce the type of potential instability that existing
compacts were designed to avoid and exacerbate the relationship between tribal govern-
ments and Gov. Stitt.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/20200609/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 18. Tribal gaming compacts get federal OK

“The Oklahoma Indian Gaming Association continues to be concerned with the legal and
political ramifications if these agreements go into effect,” Morgan said. “Our concerns
align with those of Senate and House leadership and Attorney General Mike Hunter' s legal
opinion, stating that Gov. St itt does not have the authority to enter into and bind the state
to compacts with Indian tribes that authorize gaming activity prohibited by Oklahoma law.
“While we respect the sovereignty of each Tribe to take what actions it believes it must on
behalf of its citizens, these agreements do not advance the tribal governmental gaming in-
dustry in Oklahoma.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/20200609/page/1/textview 3/3
