2020. 6. 17. Pinned man dies; 4 officers fired

Pinned man dies; 4 officers fired

‘I cannot breathe!’ he said with knee on his neck

The Dallas Morning News - 27 May 2020 - 1A - FROM WIRE REPORTS

Four Minneapolis police officers were fired Tuesday, authorities said, as state and federal
authorities investigated the arrest of a black man who died after being pinned to the
ground with one officer’s knee on his neck.

 
   

    

Video of Monday’s incident shared on social media shows the man, identified as George
Floyd by Minneapolis Mayor Jacob Frey, repeatedly telling the officers, “I cannot breathe!”
An increasingly distraught crowd of onlookers pleaded with the officer to move his knee.
“We all watched the horrific death of George Floyd on video as witnesses begged the police
officer to take him to the police car and get off his neck,” read a statement from the fam-
ily’s attorney Benjamin Crump, who also represents the families of Anmaud Arbery and
Breonna Taylor, two African Americans killed in recent highprofile incidents. “This abu-
sive, excessive and inhumane use of force cost the life of a man who was being detained by
the police for questioning about a nonviolent charge.”

In an early morning news conference Tuesday at City Hall, Police Chief Medaria Arradondo
said he had asked for the federal investigation after watching the video from a bystander
and receiving “additional information” about the incident involving several

“Being black in America should not be a death sentence. ... When you hear someone calling
for help, you’re supposed to help. This officer failed in the most basic, human sense.”
Minneapolis Mayor Jacob Frey

officers, who have since been relieved of duty.

“There was additional information that I had received that quite frankly, from community
sources, that just provided more context than I had preliminarily,” he said, without giving

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200527/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Pinned man dies; 4 officers fired

the nature or source of the information.

Frey said at the same news conference that it was clear from the video that race played a
part in the encounter.

“Being black in America should not be a death sentence,” the mayor said. “For five min-
utes, we watched a white officer press his knee into a black man’s neck. Five minutes.
When you hear someone calling for help, you’re supposed to help. This officer failed in the
most basic, human sense. What happened on Chicago and 38th last night is awful. It was
traumatic. It serves as a reminder of how far we have to go.”

He continued, visibly shaken: “Whatever the investigation reveals, it does not change the
simple truth, he should still be with us this morning.”

By Tuesday afternoon, as outrage continued to build, Frey announced the firing of the offi-
cers.

“This is the right call,” he wrote in posts on his Twitter and Facebook pages.

Officials have not publicly named the officer whose knee was on Floyd’s neck, but two peo-
ple familiar with the investigation identified him as Derek Chauvin. Multiple sources iden-
tified the other officer who is prominently featured in the video as Tou Thao.

‘Did you kill him?’

The chain of events that led to the man’s death started about 8 p.m. Monday, when police
were called to investigate a report of someone trying to pay with a counterfeit bill at a
neighborhood grocery store on the south side of Minneapolis.

Officers located the man, whom they believed to be under the influence of an intoxicant,
inside his car.

After he got out, police said, the man “physically resisted officers.”

Police said no weapons were used at any time by the man or the officers.

Darnella Frazier was on her way to see friends when she saw the incident unfolding outside
a Cup Foods grocery store. She quickly began recording the encounter in a 10minute video
later shared on Facebook.

“When I walked up, he was already on the ground,” Frazier said in a Facebook video. “The
cops, they was pinning him down by his neck and he was crying. They wasn’t trying to take
him serious.”

As more people gathered outside the grocery store, the man pleaded that his whole body
was in pain. Frazier said the man’s face was being pressed so hard against the ground that
his nose was bleeding.

Witnesses begged the white officer to take his knee off the man’s neck.

“You’re going to just sit there with your knee on his neck?” one says on the video.

Minutes later, the man appeared to be motionless on the ground, his eyes closed and his
head lying against the road.

“Bro, he’s not even [expletive] moving!” one bystander pleaded to police. “Get off of his
neck!” Another asked, “Did you kill him?” Later, the unconscious man was loaded onto a
stretcher and into an ambulance. Bystanders who remained in front of Cup Foods pointed
at the two officers and said the incident would haunt them “for the rest of your life.”

“The police killed him, bro, right in front of everybody,” Frazier said on Facebook. “He
was crying, telling them like, ‘I can’t breathe’ and everything. They killed this man.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200527/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Pinned man dies; 4 officers fired

‘There’s more to this’

Minneapolis police spokesman John Elder said the technique used to pin Floyd, who
worked security at a restaurant, was not a departmentauthorized chokehold.

“In my years as an officer, that would not be what I would ever consider a chokehold,” El-
der said.

In the chaotic hours after the incident, police issued a news release that was to be sharply
contradicted by the bystander video.

The release said that the man died at a hospital a short time after suffering a medical
episode while struggling with officers. A few hours after the incident, Elder would not say
whether the man had any preexisting medical conditions but said he had appeared to be
under the influence of alcohol or a narcotic. He said he was limited in what he could di-
vulge because the case had already been turned over to the state Bureau of Criminal Appre-
hension.

The man got out of the car on his own but then “physically resisted” officers, Elder said.
After they handcuffed him, officers noticed that the man was in “medical distress,” Elder
said, and an ambulance was called.

Elder later walked back some of those statements, saying they had been based on prelimi-
nary information.

“We try to put out information as quickly as possibly, information that we wholly believe
to be honest and true,” he said. “And as we’re looking a little further, we’re realizing
there’s more to this.”

On Tuesday evening, several hundred protesters gathered in the street where Floyd died,
chanting and carrying banners that read, “I can’t breathe” and “Jail killer Kkkops.” They
eventually marched about 2 1/02 miles to a city police precinct, with some protesters dam-
aging windows and a squad car and spraying graffiti on the building. A line of police in riot
gear eventually confronted the protesters, firing tear gas.

‘Entitled to fairness’

Because of the nature of the incident and the race of those involved, the FBI will look into
whether federal charges could be brought against the officer, Frey said.

A message left for an FBI spokesman wasn’t immediately returned Tuesday morning.

Gov. Tim Walz released a statement saying “the lack of humanity in this disturbing video
is sickening. We will get answers and seek justice.”

Hennepin County Attorney Mike Freeman said late Tuesday morning that he had his “most
veteran prosecutors” assisting with the investigation in consultation with the U.S. Attor-
ney’s Office.

“We promise a thorough, expedited review consistent with our ongoing commitment to
justice,” read a statement from Freeman, whose office will at some time determine
whether statelevel charges are warranted. “Every person is entitled to fairness; no person
stands above the law.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200527/page/1/textview 3/3
