2020. 6. 17. Restrictions in effect for seven days; other area cities follow suit

Restrictions in effect for seven days; other area cities follow suit

The Dallas Morning News - 1 Jun 2020 - 1A - By TOM STEELE, DANA BRANHAM, KYLE ARNOLD, SAM BLUM and JOSEPH HOYT
Staff Writers

Minutes after a curfew for downtown Dallas and surrounding neighborhoods went into effect at 7
p.m. Sunday, law enforcement began emptying the city center of protesters.

 

Officers deployed tear gas as crowds scattered. Others fired pepper balls at a group congregated in a
park. Police ziptied the hands of people lying on the sidewalk as they took them into custody.

“We're not playing tonight,” an officer could be heard saying over a loudspeaker.

City leaders imposed the curfew after protests Friday and Saturday night in and around downtown
were punctuated by vandalism and violence. Some demonstrators have said the peaceful events went
wrong when police began to use tear gas on the crowds.

The curfew begins at 7 p.m. and ends at 6 a.m. “for the next several days,” Police Chief U. Reneé Hall
said at a news con

ference Sunday afternoon. It covers downtown Dallas, the Cedars, Deep Ellum, Uptown and Victory
Park,

During those hours, people may not travel on public streets or be in public areas, according to emer-
gency regulations signed by City Manager T.C. Broadnax.

Defying orders

As Sunday’s curfew approached, about 500 protesters were walking down Commerce Street into
Deep Ellum, surrounded by Dallas police vehicles. Officers on loudspeakers warned that anyone who
violated the curfew would be arrested.

After protesters split into several groups, authorities followed the largest group insto Pacific Plaza
Park and began arresting people and shooting tear gas canisters at the crowd.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200601/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Restrictions in effect for seven days; other area cities follow suit

A few protesters threw metal tables into the street, but most of them ran to avoid confrontations
with police, who were wearing protective gear and holding weapons to fire gas canisters and pepper
balls.

About a dozen protesters were arrested near the park. Police continued arresting people on the street
but allowed vehicle traffic.

“You need to leave Dallas now,” blared from police cars. “The curfew is in effect.”

Police said just after 9 p.m. that 30 people had been booked into the Dallas County jail and several
more were still being processed.

Meanwhile, Aaron Sosa, an Army veteran, sat on the outskirts of Main Street Garden. Next to him
was his German shepherd, Remington, who needed to take advantage of the cooling temperatures
that come with a setting sun.

The day before, Sosa said, he gave purple Gatorade to officers who were protecting his building. In
response, he was harassed by people for showing support to law enforcement, he said.

On Sunday night, past curfew, he was one of the few people left as officers continued to push out
protesters.

“Walking around you can tell the tensions are very high,” he said. “It’s really ugly times right now,
but I feel like the city of Dallas is doing great.”

Curfew details

The curfew prohibits walking, driving, cycling, riding a scooter or using any other mode of trans-
portation in “public places” — any public or private property accessible to the public, including, but
not limited to, streets, highways, sidewalks, parks, parking lots and vacant properties.

Certain people are exempt for the curfew: police, firefighters and medical personnel; the media;
people traveling to or from work, seeking medical attention or “engaging in exempt activities”;
people who are homeless; and anyone fleeing a dangerous situation.

Those people should be prepared to show proof of residency or work credentials if they are traveling
in the curfew area, officials said.

People who violate the curfew face up to 180 days in jail and a fine of up to $1,000.

Mayor Eric Johnson issued a proclamation declaring a local state of disaster for “civil disorder and
threats of rioting" on Sunday afternoon. The proclamation allowed the city manager to issue emer-
gency regulations, including the curfew.

The mayor’s proclamation is set to expire in seven days.

All DART buses, lightrail service and streetcars and TRE trains into the curfew area will be sus-
pended during curfew hours. Shuttle buses will be available for people who need to travel through
the curfew areas, but they won’t stop at stations within those boundaries.

Police said businesses in the area are being urged to close at 5 p.m.

‘No longer peaceful’

The police chief said at Sunday’s news conference that what Dallas had seen over the previous two
days was “no longer peaceful protesting.”

“Our hearts go out to the Floyd family, but this is not what we’re dealing with,” Hall said, referring
to George Floyd, a Minnesota man who died Monday when an officer knelt on his neck for nearly
nine minutes.

“We are dealing with individuals who are vandalizing property, attempting to injure police officers”
and putting people there to protest peacefully in harm’s way, she said. “This will not be tolerated in
our city.”

Hall said the recent protests began peacefully but escalated as the group splintered into smaller fac-
tions. She again defended her officers’ use of tear gas to force crowds to disperse.

She said protesters who had been arrested were largely not from the city of Dallas but didn’t specify
whether they were coming from neighboring cities or farther away. A police spokesman, Sgt. Warren
https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200601/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Restrictions in effect for seven days; other area cities follow suit

Mitchell, said the department is still working on gathering information breaking down who was ar-
rested and where they are from.

Johnson said earlier Sunday on WFAATV (Channel 8) that he’d consider a curfew if law enforcement
asked for one.

“Curfews are a law enforcement tool,” the mayor said. “It’s not something that you impose without
there having to be any change in your policing strategy.”

Broadnax, the city manager, tweeted Sunday evening that the safety of residents, employees, busi-
ness patrons and first responders was “our highest priority in instituting” the curfew.

“Feelings of anger are valid,” he said. “To heal from this we must unite as One Dallas.”

Denton

Denton Mayor Chris Watts issued an order Sunday implementing a curfew in his city, which has not
seen the same level of protests as Dallas or other cities across the country.

The curfew is from 9 p.m. to 6 a.m. and is set to expire after seven days.

It covers downtown Denton, as well as the county building complex east of downtown.

Also in those areas, certain items are prohibited from 5 p.m. to 6 a.m.: backpacks, briefcases, camera
bags, computer bags, coolers, luggage and purses larger than a small clutch; projectiles and rigid
signs "that could be used as weapons to damage property; and weapons, including pepper spray.
Police, first responders and the media are exempt from the curfew, as are people who are going to
work, seeking medical attention or fleeing dangerous situations. People who are homeless also are
exempt.

Anyone who violates the order may be fined up to $500.

Watts said the order would keep residents safe and protect private property.

“Like many of you, I was deeply shocked and saddened by the senseless killing of George Floyd,” the
mayor said in a written statement. “I support the right of every citizen to peacefully protest to ex-
press their anger, sadness and call for reform; however, at this time we must do all we can to protect
those in attendance, other bystanders, and the surrounding area from any potential harm.”

Police said they would conduct their normal patrols in the area subject to the curfew.

Park Cities

The mayors of Highland Park and University Park issued a curfew from 7 p.m. Sunday to 6 a.m.
Monday.

The curfew covers the entirety of both cities.

“Adherence to the curfew order is simple: stay in your homes during curfew hours,” a joint state-
ment said.

Law enforcement “will remain highly visible in our neighborhoods” during the curfew, according to
the statement.

The statement did not provide for any exceptions to the curfew. Calls to city and town officials were
not immediately returned.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200601/page/1/textview 3/3
