2020. 6. 17. States see alarming rise in cases with lockdowns’ end

States see alarming rise in cases with lockdowns’ end
AP analysis shows concerning trend in ‘disaster that spreads’

The Dallas Morning News - 12 Jun 2020: 1A: By MIKE STOBBE

NEW YORK — States are rolling back lockdowns, but the coronavirus isn’t done with the
US.

eta ‘ttt? «©

 

Cases are rising in nearly half the states, according to an Associated Press analysis, a wor-
rying trend that could intensify as people return to work and venture out during the sum-
mer.

In Arizona, hospitals have been told to prepare for the worst. Texas has more hospitalized
COVID19 patients than at any time before. And the governor of North Carolina said recent
jumps caused him to rethink plans to reopen schools and businesses.

There is no single reason for

the surges. In some cases, more testing has revealed more cases. In others, local outbreaks
are big enough to push statewide tallies higher. But experts think at least some are due to
lifting stayathome orders, school and business closures, and other restrictions put in place
during the spring to stem the virus’s spread.

The increase in infections pulled stocks down sharply Thursday on Wall Street, dragging
the Dow Jones Industrial Average more than 1,800 points lower and giving the S&P 500 its
worst day in nearly three months. The infections deflated recent optimism that the econ-
omy could recover quickly from its worst crisis in decades.

The virus is also gradually fanning out.

“It is a disaster that spreads,” said Dr. Jay Butler, who oversees coronavirus response work
at the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “It’s not like there’s an entire con-
tinental seismic shift and everyone feels the shaking all at once.”

The increases are also happening globally. Places that suffered early on, such as China,
Italy and Spain, have calmed down, but Brazil, India and other countries that were spared
initially are seeing large increases.

The world is seeing more than 100,000 newly confirmed cases every day, according to
Johns Hopkins University.

The virus first landed on the

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 2/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. States see alarming rise in cases with lockdowns’ end

U.S. coasts, carried by international travelers infected abroad. For months, the epicenter
was in Northeastern states. More recently, the biggest increases have been in the South
and the West.

The AP analyzed data compiled by The COVID Tracking Project, a volunteer organization
that collects coronavirus testing data in the United States.

The analysis found that, as of Monday, in 21 states the rolling sevenday average of new
cases per capita was higher than the average seven days earlier.

One concern is that large recent racial justice protests across the country might spark at
least some spread of the virus.

Here’s what’s driving increases in some of the states with notable upticks.

Arizona

Republican Gov. Doug Ducey ended Arizona’s stayathome order on May 15 and eased re-
strictions on businesses. Arizona residents who were cooped up for six weeks flooded
Phoenixarea bar districts, ignoring social distancing guidelines.

The state began seeing a surge of new cases and hospitalizations about 10 days later.

“It seems pretty clear to me that what we’ re seeing is directly related to the end of the
stayathome order,” said Will Humble, executive director of the Arizona Public Health As-
sociation.

It wasn’t just that the order ended: There were no requirements to wear face masks, no
major increases in contact tracing to spot and stop evolving outbreaks, and no scaleup of
infection control at nursing homes, he said.

“Those are missed opportunities that, if implemented today, could still make a big differ-
ence,” Humble said.

The AP analysis found Arizona had a rolling average of fewer than 400 new cases a day at
the time the shutdown was lifted, but it shot up two weeks later and surpassed 1,000 new
cases a day by early this week. Hospitalizations have also risen dramatically, hitting the
1,200 mark last week.

North Carolina

In North Carolina, more testing plus more people out and about during reopening seem to
be the main drivers of recent case upticks, said Kimberly Powers, an associate professor of
epidemiology at the University of North Carolina.

On Saturday, the state recorded its highest singleday increase, with 1,370 new cases. While
testing has increased in the last two weeks, so has the rate of tests coming back positive.
“These trends moving in the wrong direction is a signal we need to take very seriously,”
said North Carolina’s top health official, Mandy Cohen, who has urged citizens to take pre-
cautions to protect themselves.

Texas

Few states are rebooting faster than Texas, where hospitalizations surged past 2,100 on
Wednesday for the first time during the pandemic.

That’s a 42% increase in patients since Memorial Day weekend, when beachgoers
swarmed the state coastline and a water park near Houston opened to big crowds in defi-
ance of Republican Gov. Greg Abbott’s orders.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 2/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. States see alarming rise in cases with lockdowns’ end

The state’s percentage of tests coming back positive has also jumped to levels that are
among the nation’s highest. Texas officials point to hot spots at meatpacking plants and
prisons in rural counties, where thousands of new cases have cropped up, but have not of-
fered explanations for a rise in numbers elsewhere.

Alabama

In Alabama, outbreaks in nursing homes and poultry plants helped drive state numbers
upward. On Wednesday, the state recorded its largest number of new cases in a day, 849.
The previous high was 640 on June 5.

The capital, Montgomery, has become an emerging hot spot, State Health Officer Scott
Harris said.

“I think reopening the economy gave a lot of people the wrong impression ... that, ‘Hey ev-
erything is fine. Let’s go back to normal,’ ” Harris said.

“Clearly, it is not that way. Really, now more than ever we need people to stay 6 feet apart,
wear face coverings and wash their hands.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 2/page/1/textview 3/3
