2020. 6. 18. Former health official kept on as special adviser

Former health official kept on as special adviser

The Oklahoman « 2 Jun 2020 - Ai - By Nolan Clay Staff writer nclay@oklahoman.com

Forced out of the top j ob at the Oklahoma Health Department, former Commissioner Gary
Cox remains on the state payroll as a special adviser.

+
Cox ,73, will serve in the new capacity until July 3 and make another $22,600, The
Oklahoman has learned.
“T have great concern about that,” Senate leader Roger Thompson, R-Okemah,
said Monday.
Cox was commissioner only eight months. He had
to step down by law last month when the state Senate adjourned without confirming him.
Thompson, chairman of t he Senate Appropriations Committee, said , “I will be looking
into it a little bit deeper and see why we' re creating a new position at the Health Depart-
ment.”
Gov. Kevin Stitt on May 22 named an Oklahoma Air National Guard surgeon, Col. Lance
Frye, to serve as interim commissioner. The same day, t he state's chief operating officer,
John Budd, directed a change in Cox's title to “special advisor.”
“Given that were main in a pandemic( and in fact under a Catastrophic Health Emergency),
t he Governor believes it is important to provide Interim Commissioner Frye all the sup-
port he needs in this transition period so we continue to protect the lives and health of Ok-
lahomans,” Budd wrote in an email.
“Special Advisor Cox will remain in that capacity for six weeks ... to help with the transi-
tion.”
The opposition to Cox's confirmation last month was so widespread in the Senate that it
wasn't even scheduled for a committee hearing.
Senators said they had concerns because Cox did not meet the legal requirements for the
job. They said they also had concerns after the attorney general asked for an investigative
audit of the Health Department and after hearing complaints from employees there.
“You just kind of pile all that together and it became really, really hard to confirm him,”
Sen. Greg McCortney, chairman of the Senate Health and Human Services Committee, said
last month.
As a special adviser, Cox is“providing consultation on the agency's operations that involve
roughly 1,500 employees and a $430 million budget as well as the agency's programs de-
veloped specific to COVID-19 response,” the Health Department said Monday.
His salary as commissioner was $196,000 per year. “We did not change his salary for the
six-week advisory period,” the Health Department said.
The governor' s office Monday defended the decision.
“It is common in the Stitt administration, as in many well-run organizations, to tempo-
rarily keep departing high-level employees as advisers during leadership changes,”
spokesman Charlie Hannema said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/20200602/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. Former health official kept on as special adviser

“Gary Cox's leadership with the Governor's Solution Task Force played a key role in Okla-
homa' s strong and successful response to an unprecedented pandemic. Making an abrupt
tr an siti on while still managing the impacts of COVID- 1 9 is not in the best interest of Ok-
lahomans.”

Also Monday, the Health Department announced it can no longer by law provide details
about COVID-19 cases by city, ZIP code and nursing home/ long-term care facility because
the state's catastrophic emergency declaration has expired.

The declaration had allowed the governor to suspend laws restricting the release of such
information.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/20200602/page/1/textview 2/2
