2020. 6. 17. GOP favors Dallas for convention, but AAC may be booked.

GOP favors Dallas for convention, but AAC may be booked.
Local officials say they haven’t been contacted

The Dallas Morning News - 5 Jun 2020 - 1A - By TODD J. GILLMAN Washington Bureau tgillman@dallasnews.com

WASHINGTON — Republicans scrambling for a new site for their August presidential con-
vention named Dallas as one of the half dozen possibilities.

But as of Thursday, Dallas officials haven’t heard a thing. Nor are they laying out a wel-
come mat, unlike some of the competition.

While the city’s hotels are wide open, thanks to pandemicrelated cancellations, the down-
town arena that hosts the Dallas

Mavericks and Dallas Stars — the venue at the heart of the city’s bid for the 2016 GOP con-
vention — is not.

“We are on hold as one of the finalist cities for NHL playoffs,” said Dave Brown, American
Airlines Center’s chief operating officer and general manager. “We’re on hold for them
July through September. We have our fingers crossed and hope we’re successful for land-
ing NHL games. They have first priority.”

With North Carolina Gov. Roy Cooper refusing to commit to allowing 19,000 cheering
Republicans to pack an arena with no masks or social distancing, President Donald Trump
has ordered the event out of Charlotte on short notice.

Dallas is on a short list of fallback sites for the Aug. 2427 event, according to national
Republican Party officials, along with Orlando and Jacksonville, Fla.; New Orleans; Las Ve-
gas; and Nashville, Tenn.

Radio silence

At Dallas City Hall, Mayor Eric Johnson hasn’t heard from any GOP officials, said
spokesman Tristan Hallman.

Nor has the city’s convention and visitor’s bureau.

“The RNC has not reached out to us,” said Craig Davis, president and CEO of Visitdallas. “If
we are in the mix ... we would be some of the first to know.”

Brown likewise isn’t aware of any outreach by the Republican National Committee.

“The American Airlines Center has not been approached,” he said.

It’s doubtful that AT&T Stadium is in position to host the event, either. The Dallas Cow-
boys have preseason games scheduled at the stadium on the Saturdays before and after the
convention.

Nor is Globe Life Field, the Texas Rangers’ new ballpark in Arlington, a likely contender.
Major League Baseball hasn’t said if it will have a season. But convention planners would
insist on at least two weeks of exclusive control of any venue for set up and security, plus a
week for tear down and clean up afterward. That would be too much, a source said.

In any case, a football or baseball stadium would risk too many empty seats, and unaccept-
able optics for Trump.

The president will be in Dallas next Thursday for a $7 million private fundraising dinner —
$580,600 per couple.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200605/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. GOP favors Dallas for convention, but AAC may be booked.

The cityowned Kay Bailey Hutchison Convention Center is available. That’s where Presi-
dent Ronald Reagan accepted the nomination for a second term in 1984.

A traditional fullscale GOP convention would entail a throng of delegates, alternates and
other party activists packing the seats and floor of an arena as the president accepts the
nomination, with thousands of news media, donors, protesters and security inside or
nearby.

What Trump wants

Trump has indicated that he won’t settle for anything less for his triumphal moment, re-
gardless of the COVID19 risks.

Under Gov. Greg Abbott’s latest public health order, convention venues are now allowed to
open at 50% capacity. Any outdoor gathering of over 500 people requires the approval of
local authorities. In Dallas, that’s County Judge Clay Jenkins, a Democrat who has clashed
with Abbott during the pandemic.

Jenkins didn’t respond to inquiries on Thursday.

Like the mayor, Jenkins hasn’t publicly expressed any enthusiasm for the Republicans
coming to town en masse. And after the snub from North Carolina’s governor, Trump has
insisted on going somewhere with more politically friendly leadership.

“The president wants to go to a city to accept the nomination in a venue that would allow
people to not wear masks and not have proper social distancing,” said Davis of Visitdallas.
“He wants to accept the nomination in front of his adoring crowd, without masks.”

James Dickey, chairman of the Texas Republican Party, said he hasn’t had any discussions
with the party’s national leadership about Dallas playing host, though Texas Republicans
would welcome that.

He noted that Dallas was a close runnerup for the 2016 convention, which ended up in
Cleveland. It was a “spectacular” bid, he said, speculating that the party’s convention
planners may not need to visit yet, because they already have detailed insight into what
Dallas can offer.

Abbott and Lt. Gov. Dan Patrick have not publicly courted the convention. Aides did not re-
spond to requests to discuss the possibility.

That’s a contrast to counterparts in other states.

“To just rule out a convention at this stage, I think, is a mistake, Florida Gov. Ron Desantis
told Fox News on Thursday. “So we’ve said we want to get to ‘yes’ on it, and I think we’l]
be able to do it.”

Jacksonville Mayor Lenny Curry tweeted at the party’s national chairwoman, Ronna
Mcdaniel, that his city would welcome the convention. “A $100 million local impact event
would be important for our city.”

GOP lawmakers in Tennessee have floated scrounging together state funding to lure the
convention to Nashville, though the city’s Democratic mayor says the coronavirus out-
break has left municipal coffers depleted, and one council member is pushing a resolution
to withdraw from consideration.

The Charlotte host committee is refusing to give up, imploring the RNC and the state’s
governor on Thursday to keep talking in hopes of finding a mutually agreeable way to keep
the event in the city.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200605/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. GOP favors Dallas for convention, but AAC may be booked.

Coronavirus concerns

The public health situation has made hosting a dicey prospect anywhere, if the event is at
full size.

Texas recorded a spike in new infections in the past week that outpaced the increase in
testing, suggesting that the outbreak is getting worse as the state reopens.

Politically, Texas would be a great place for Republicans to go, though, said Bill Miller, a
GOP strategist in Austin.

In 2018, Beto O’rourke came within 3 points of toppling Sen. Ted Cruz. Trump’s gpoint win
over Hillary Clinton in 2016 was the worst showing for a Republican presidential nominee
since 1976.

The latest polls show Trump in a dead heat in Texas against former Vice President Joe Bi-
den.

There’s no sense pretending that Republicans can’t take Texas for granted anymore, Miller
said.

“Anyone that says, Oh, we don’t care, we’re cool — they’re stupid. They’re not paying at-
tention,” he said.

“Everyone knows Texas is ultra important. If the Republicans lose Texas, they’ve lost the
country,” Miller said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200605/page/1/textview 3/3
