2020. 6. 16. Inspectors general

Inspectors general

As the independent watchdogs’ self-appointed defender, a GOP senator
runs up against the president.

The Washington Post - 26 May 2020 - A1 - BY SEUNG MIN KIM seung-min.kim@washpost.com Matt Viser contributed to
this report.

The 665-word letter had gone, as expected, unanswered. So Sen. Charles E. Grassley fired
off an email to the White House Counsel’s Office, pressing for an explanation as to why
President Trump abruptly dismissed an inspector general who had played a key role in the
Ukraine scandal that led to Trump’s impeachment.

 

Pat Cipollone called Grassley (R-iowa) directly, promising he would get a response to the
senator quickly on the firing of Michael Atkinson, the intelligence community watchdog
who had alerted lawmakers to a whistleblower’s complaint about Trump pressuring
Ukraine to investigate his political rival.

The two would speak again last week, with the White House lawyer promising an answer to
Grassley by Tuesday that would detail the reasons for firing Atkinson and another inspec-
tor general who had recently been ousted by Trump.

“It could be one additional letter, or it could be 10 additional letters,” Grassley noted as he
described his past attempts to glean information from various administrations. “But it is
frustrating.”

Grassley is facing the stiffest challenge of his nearly four-decade Senate career to his self-
appointed role as a champion of inspectors general: a president from his own party who
has made clear that he has no use for internal government watchdogs and no hesitation to
get rid of those he considers disloyal.

Grassley says he resents Democrats’ questioning of his dedication to protecting these gov-
ernment officials. But so far amid Trump’s rapid-fire dismissals of the watchdogs, he has
refrained from taking aggressive action beyond sending carefully worded letters that don’t
appear to have had much, if any, impact on Trump’s attitude or actions toward inspectors
general.

The 86-year-old Grassley is coming under criticism that on protecting government
watchdogs in the Trump era, he’s all bark and no bite.

In a virtual roundtable in Wisconsin last week, former vice president Joe Biden, the pre-

sumptive Democratic presidential nominee, argued that Republicans had abandoned their
https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200526/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 16. Inspectors general

longstanding defense of inspectors general and singled out Grassley.

“They were strongly, strongly, strongly supportive of these independent inspector gener-
als, starting with Chairman Grassley and others. Where are they? Why aren’t they speaking
up about this? It really bothers me — bothers me a lot,” Biden said.

Grassley’s response is that he is precisely the same man Biden knew when both men
served in the Senate.

“Unfortunately, a lot of Democrats question my record on this issue, and you’ve been see-
ing here in the last couple of weeks,” Grassley said in an interview with The Washington
Post last week. “They do that when it’s politically convenient, and I quite honestly resent
that.”

Grassley continued: “They ought to have the same attitude toward oversight, whether you
have a Republican or Democrat president.”

Still, the scrutiny is undoubtedly increasing on Grassley, as Trump takes unprecedented
steps to remove watchdogs who have played significant roles in administration controver-
sies or on the suggestion of his closest advisers. The president recently indicated he would
terminate Steve Linick, the State Department’s inspector general who had started to in-
vestigate alleged misconduct on the part of Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, one of his
most influential Cabinet officials. Pompeo had advised Trump to dismiss Linick.

In addition to Linick and Atkinson, Trump has moved to replace Christi Grimm, principal
deputy inspector general for the Department of Health and Human Services who has run
the office since January, by nominating a permanent inspector general for HHS. Grimm’s
office released a report on acute shortages of testing and personal protective gear amid the
coronavirus pandemic, and she is scheduled to testify before the House on Tuesday.
Trump also removed Glenn Fine, who had been the acting inspector general for the Pen-
tagon and was to chair a federal panel overseeing the Trump administration’s manage-
ment of the $2 trillion coronavirus rescue package passed by Congress in March. And Mitch
Behm was removed on May 15 as acting Transportation Department inspector general,
though he will remain with the office.

A1978 law created the modernday inspector general, and Grassley was elected to the Se-
nate two years later. The dozens of inspectors general across the administration conduct
oversight of federal agencies, and although they are technically political appointees, their
independence has long been prized.

Grassley, two other Republican senators — Mitt Romney (Utah) and Susan Collins (Maine)
— and a few Democratic senators sought details about the reason for the Atkinson dis-
missal, noting that a 2008 law requires a president to give lawmakers a written explana-
tion for removing any inspector general. On his own, Grassley earlier last week sent Trump
a similar letter on Linick, noting that lost confidence alone was not a sufficient explana-
tion.

The action, Grassley said, mirrors the approach he and a bipartisan group of senators took
in 2009 when President Barack Obama summarily dismissed Gerald Walpin, the inspector
general of the Corporation for National and Community Service, which operates the
Americorps program, without giving Congress an adequate explanation.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200526/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 16. Inspectors general

Even after the Obama White House provided a response, Grassley and then-rep. Darrell
Issa (R- Calif.) continued their investigation into the firing, releasing a report on the mat-
ter later that year. It’s premature to know whether Grassley or other senators will similarly
investigate after the Trump White House responds to its inspectors general firings.

“Very few folks paid attention to it like they’re paying attention to this,” Grassley said of
the Walpin controversy.

But Walpin was the only inspector general that was fired in such a fashion under the
Obama administration. The speed and scale of Trump’s dismissals are much broader and,
according to critics and some Republicans, much more concerning.

“T look less at individual circumstances, and the fact that we’ve had four,” Romney said. “I
feel that that has the potential of sending a chilling message.”

Sen. Chris Murphy (D- Conn.), who has drafted his own legislation to protect inspectors
general, dismissed the letters, arguing that “they’re of absolutely no utility” because
Trump ignores them.

“T think the broader problem here is that the Republican Congress, the Republican Senate,
just believes it’s an appendage of the White House,” Murphy said. “They act as if they work
for the president. So they’re allowed to occasionally raise internal objections, but they’re
never going to do anything to actually change the president’s behavior.”

Indeed, this president’s aggressive antipathy toward oversight underscored how much the
powers of congressional investigations and oversight have diminished. Trump’s White
House has ignored subpoenas, done an end run around congressional funding and relied
heavily on acting appointees who escape Senate scrutiny.

Trump underscored his grievances against the inspectors general last week, arguing that
he has been “treated very unfairly” by them.

The class of Senate Republicans who have shown outward concern about the dismissals of
the inspectors general is small. The issue didn’t surface when Trump made an impromptu
visit to Capitol Hill earlier last week to have lunch with GOP senators, and Majority Leader
Mitch Mcconnell (R-KY.) has said the firings were well within Trump’s authority.

The few who have spoken out include Collins and Romney, who said last week that he had
conversations with administration officials about Linick’s dismissal. Sens. James Lankford
(R- Okla.) and Rob Portman (R- Ohio) have also gently prodded Trump in a letter to senda
message “to the executive branch to work with IGS, not against them.”

“Senator Grassley has been so amazing for so many decades, it’s kind of unfair for every-
one to always turn to him,” said Danielle Brian, the executive director for the Project on
Government Oversight. “This is very politically difficult for a person to challenge their own
party’s administration, and he shouldn’t be expected to do it by himself.”

Any Grassley challenge to Trump would cast a spotlight on his fellow Iowa senator, Joni
Ernst (R), who is up for reelection this November in an increasingly difficult political envi-
ronment for the GOP with its Senate majority at stake.

“Tt really isn’t Grassley versus Obama or Grassley versus Trump or Grassley versus Bush or
even going back to Reagan. It’s Article I of the Constitution versus Article II of the Consti-
tution,” Grassley said. “It’s easy to pass laws and appropriate money, but to get it carried
out the way you intended to carry out is what oversight’s all about.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200526/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 16. Inspectors general

Democrats say Grassley should be willing to go as far as holding up nominees or calling for
hearings into the inspector general firings because he’s proved he’s willing to do so for
other matters.

As he awaits a response from the White House on why Trump ousted Linick and Atkinson,
Grassley has started drafting bipartisan legislation that would bar political appointees
from serving as acting inspectors general in an attempt to protect their independence.
Linick has been temporarily replaced by Stephen J. Akard, an ally of Vice President Pence
who was confirmed as the head of the Office of Foreign Missions at the State Department
in the fall.

Grassley has declined to name the Democrat he has been working with, but aides said it is
Sen. Gary Peters (Mich.), the ranking Democrat on the Senate Homeland Security and Gov-
ernmental Affairs Committee. That panel would probably have jurisdiction over any hear-
ings on the firings, but that appears unlikely; its chairman, Sen. Ron Johnson (RWis.) —
like most other GOP senators — has not opposed the dismissals.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200526/page/1/textview 4/4
