2020. 6. 17. Vaccine access: Global leaders aim to help poorer nations.

Vaccine access: Global leaders aim to help poorer nations.

At summit, plan is unveiled to ensure that poor nations have access

The Washington Post : 5 Jun 2020: A1 : BY WILLIAM WAN AND CAROLYN Y. JOHNSON william.wan@washpost.com
carolyn.johnson@washpost.com

Global leaders came together Thursday to raise at least $2 billion toward providing a future
vaccine for the novel coronavirus to people throughout the world — a precarious diplo-
matic endeavor and one of the biggest unresolved problems in using a vaccine to combat
the pandemic.

The virtual summit was convened by a public-private partnership called Gavi, which aims
to increase vaccination rates in lower-income countries. At the summit, Gavi unveiled a
proposal to ensure that poor- and middleincome countries have access to the vaccine. The
proposal the group sketched out also includes a way wealthy countries can get access to the
same vaccines while supporting equitable global distribution.

The twists and turns of the scientific race to develop and mass produce a vaccine are being
closely followed, with mere hints of progress sending the stock market surging. But an
even more important challenge looms, because any vaccine will have to be distributed
globally to stamp out the pandemic as quickly as possible and avoid a humanitarian disas-
ter in which rich countries restart their economies while people in poorer countries con-
tinue to die.

“Lots of countries are working with various manufacturers on [vaccine] supply for their
countries. We need to overlay that approach with a global approach, so that most of the
output is going to a rational system of allocation of doses to those most at risk,” said Bill
Gates, co-chairman of the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, who pledged $1.6 billion to
support Gavi’s mission to expand access to childhood vaccinations and $100 million more
toward efforts to buy vaccines against the coronavirus for the poorest countries.

“Sadly, the disease will probably be worse in the developing countries, even though it was
slow to get going there, because the health system is weaker and the idea of doing a lock-
down is not as practical,” he said.

Gavi — backed by the Gates Foundation, the World Health Organization, World Bank,
UNICEF and governments of countries around the world — is seeking donations from
many of those same groups and countries for the coronavirus vaccine campaign.

At Thursday’s virtual summit, hosted by British Prime Minister Boris Johnson, interna-
tional health officials unveiled a global funding mechanism they hope will help secure ac-
cess to a coronavirus vaccine for poorer countries. The mechanism — called an “advance
market commitment” — functions as a preorder for the developing world. It’s a guarantee
that Gavi will purchase vaccines at a particular price for developing countries to make the
process less financially risky for companies scaling up now.

On Thursday, British company Astrazeneca announced an agreement to set aside 300 mil-
lion doses of a vaccine it is developing for Gavi’s new effort. And the Coalition for Epidemic
Preparedness Innovations (CEPI) said it will invest $383 million into that partnership.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200605/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Vaccine access: Global leaders aim to help poorer nations.

The idea for such a mechanism began gaining traction about 15 years ago and has been
used to create a market for a pneumococcal vaccine for lower-income countries. In 2009,
governments came together to pledge $1.5 billion to buy that vaccine, with companies bid-
ding for contracts to supply the projected global demand.

Seth Berkley, CEO of Gavi, said manufacturers are drawn to that arrangement because it
guarantees them payment for vaccines sent to developing countries, reducing the financial
risk for drug companies. At the same time, the large orders allow those companies to scale
up production, dramatically lower their cost, and achieve more profit when they sell those
vaccines at an increased cost to higher-income countries.

The Gavi mechanism also would allow high- and upper-income countries to pledge
money, join the effort and in return gain access to vaccines covered under the agreement.
That could be a way for countries that are advancing individual vaccine efforts to have ac-
cess to a broader range of inoculation candidates in case their experimental vaccines fail.
Despite the tremendous energy and funding flowing into research for a coronavirus vac-
cine, the success of any individual effort is far from guaranteed.

“The reality is most vaccines will fail,” Berkley said. “If you as a country just buy into one
vaccine, and it ends up working, that’s great. If it doesn’t, you end up with nothing. Ina
sense, this is like an insurance policy.”

Gavi, the WHO and other international groups note that without global cooperation, the
coronavirus will continue spreading. Even if countries think selfishly and hoard supplies,
they will struggle with new outbreaks as long as the virus continues to rage elsewhere in
the world because of how easily it spreads.

It is a particularly tough time for such international cooperation.

Borders around the world remain heavily restricted or closed. America’s future participa-
tion in the WHO, a key international body for facilitating global cooperation, remains un-
clear as President Trump has threatened to terminate the relationship. The blame game for
the pandemic rages between the United States and China.

Nations have found themselves competing for limited protective equipment, tests and
ventilators.

The vaccine will be a precious and initially limited resource that appears destined to fur-
ther strain the fragile framework for international cooperation. In past pandemics, even
when the threat has been less acute and the impulse for global cooperation stronger, ef-
forts to equitably distribute vaccines have been among the most controversial and fraught
areas of global health policy.

“We haven’t had to deal with a serious infectious-disease outbreak in the context in which
the balance of power mattered since the end of the Cold War,” said David P. Fidler, an ad-
junct senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations.

Some chief executives of pharmaceutical companies have vowed they will not profit off the
vaccine during the pandemic and will participate in efforts to make sure the world has ac-
cess. But it is unclear how that will unfold.

Reacting to news of the new Gavi mechanism, international medical humanitarian organi-
zation Doctors Without Borders expressed concern it would not prevent pharmaceutical
companies from making decisions purely driven by profit. The group urged global leaders

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200605/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Vaccine access: Global leaders aim to help poorer nations.

to demand pharmaceutical firms commit to selling any potential coronavirus vaccines at
the cost of production.

“Everyone seems to agree that we can’t apply business-as-usual principles here, where
the highest bidders get to protect their people from this disease first, while the rest of the
world is left behind,” Kate Elder, the group’s senior vaccines policy adviser, said in a state-
ment. “Governments must ensure any future COVID-19 vaccines are sold at cost and uni-
versally accessible to all across the world.”

In recent weeks, the three international bodies most involved in the pursuit of a vaccine
have developed a working framework for research, procurement and distribution. Under
that framework, CEPI, a global alliance set up to develop vaccines, is helping to lead and
coordinate the research. Gavi has the task of figuring out the economics and incentives
needed to scale up coronavirus vaccine manufacturing and ensuring poorer countries have
access.

Meanwhile, the WHO will lead the effort to ensure fair allocation among nations and to de-
velop recommendations about who should be at the front of the line to get a vaccine —
health-care workers, for instance.

“Governments must ensure any future COVID-19 vaccines are sold at cost and universally
accessible to all across the world.” Kate Elder, of Doctors Without Borders, in a statement

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200605/page/1/textview 3/3
