2020. 6. 17. Angry demonstrators take to the streets across U.S.

Angry demonstrators take to the streets across U.S.

At least 5 people are killed as pockets of violence smolder

The Dallas Moming News « 1 Jun 2020 - 1A: By TIM SULLIVAN

MINNEAPOLIS — Protests formed again across the United States on Sunday, with some violence and
crime flaring within pockets of largely peaceful demonstrations fueled by the killings of black people
at the hands of police.

 

From Boston to San Francisco, protesters took to the streets once more, and several cities closed
streets and imposed curfews after days of turmoil. People looted stores in daylight in Philadelphia
and Santa Monica, Calif.

At least five people were killed in violence as demonstrations in parts of the country devolved into
mayhem. Gunfire was reported in Detroit, Indianapolis and Omaha, Neb. At least 4,100 people have
been arrested over days of protests since the death of George Floyd.

In Minneapolis, a tanker truck sped into a peaceful crowd of thousands on a closed highway, but no
protesters appeared to have been hit, authorities said. The Minnesota State Patrol said on Twitter
that the driver

was apparently trying to provoke protesters and was arrested.

Police arrived in force to clear the highway, which is located in the city where the turbulence erupted
last week after the death of Floyd — a black man who pleaded that he couldn’t breathe after a white
Minneapolis police officer pressed a knee into his neck for several minutes. The protests quickly be-
came national, spreading to dozens of cities large and small.

The officer who pressed his knee onto Floyd’s neck has been arrested and charged with murder, but
protesters are demanding charges against all four officers at the scene. All four were fired.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200601/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. Angry demonstrators take to the streets across U.S.

In neighboring St. Paul, thousands gathered peacefully in front of the state Capitol, pledging to keep
up the protests.

“We're Minnesota nice, but we’re not Minnesota dumb, and we’re not done,” said Darnella Wade, a
St. Paul Black Lives Matter organizer.

Minnesota Gov. Tim Walz brought in thousands of National Guard members to help quell the vio-
lence, which damaged or destroyed hundreds of buildings in Minneapolis over days of protests. The
immense deployment appeared to have worked Saturday night, when there was comparatively little
destruction.

Walz said Sunday that the state’s attorney general, Keith Ellison, would take the lead in any prose-
cutions related to Floyd’s death. The announcement came after requests from activists, City Council
members and a civil rights group.

On Sunday, in a display of force, long lines of state patrol officers and National Guard members were
lined up in front of the Capitol, facing the demonstrators, with perhaps a dozen militarystyle ar-
mored vehicles behind them.

On Twitter Sunday, President Donald Trump accused anarchists and the media of fueling the vio-
lence. Attorney General William Barr pointed a finger at “far left extremist” groups. Police chiefs
and politicians accused outsiders of coming in and causing the problems.

‘Sick and tired’

Across the United States, demonstrators called again for an end to police violence.

“They keep killing our people,” said Mahira Louis, 15, who marched with her mother and several
hundred others through downtown Boston. “I’m so sick and tired of it.”

Many also joined police in pleading for a stop to the street violence, saying it weakened calls for jus-
tice and reform.

“It only hurts the cause,” said Danielle Outlaw, head of the police force in Philadelphia, where more
than 200 people were arrested as fires and looting engulfed the heart of the city.

Disgust over ongoing incidents of racism, including a string of recent racially charged killings,
stoked the anger. Also contributing to the tension was angst from months of lockdowns brought on
by the coronavirus pandemic, which has disproportionately hurt communities of color, not only in
terms of infections but in job losses and economic stress.

“Maybe this country will get the memo that we are sick of police murdering unarmed black men,”
said Lex Scott, founder of Black Lives Matter Utah. “Maybe the next time a white police officer de-
cides to pull the trigger, he will picture cities burning.”

The scale of the protests, sweeping from coast to coast and unfolding on a single night, rivaled the
historic demonstrations of the civil rights and Vietnam War eras.

Curfews were imposed in major cities around the U.S., including Atlanta, Chicago, Dallas, Denver,
Los Angeles, San Francisco and Seattle. About 5,000 National Guard members and airmen were acti-
vated in 15 states and Washington, D.C.

At the Minneapolis intersection where Floyd was killed, people gathered with brooms and flowers,
saying it was important to protect what they called a “sacred space.” The intersection was blocked
with traffic cones, and a ring of flowers was laid out.

Among those descending on Minneapolis was Michael Brown Sr., the father of Michael Brown,
whose killing by a police officer in Ferguson, Mo., set off unrest in 2014.

“T understand what this family is feeling. I understand what this community is feeling,” he said.
Hennepin County Commissioner Angela Conley said the demonstrations and confrontations with
police would continue until the other three officers who were at the scene when Floyd was pinned
down are arrested and prosecuted. The officer who held his knee on Floyd’s neck, Derek Chauvin,
was charged last week with murder. All four officers have been fired.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200601/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. Angry demonstrators take to the streets across U.S.

“We'll continue to have this militarized presence in our community until justice is done,” Conley
said.

Elsewhere

Protesters started fires near the White House as tensions with police mounted during a third
straight night of demonstrations.

An hour before the 11 p.m. curfew, police fired a major barrage of tear gas stun grenades into the
crowd of more than 1,000 people, largely clearing Lafayette Park across the street from the White
House and scattering protesters into the street.

Protesters piled up road signs and plastic barriers and lit a raging fire in the middle of H Street.
Some pulled an American flag from a nearby building and threw it into the blaze. Others added
branches pulled from trees. A cinder block structure on the north side of the park that had bath-
rooms and a maintenance office was engulfed in flames.

Earlier Sunday, crews near the White House worked to replace windows that had been shattered with
large pieces of wood. Buildings for blocks were marked with graffiti, including curses about Trump.
Shattered glass still covered the sidewalks. The damaged buildings included the Department of Vet-
erans Affairs, directly across the street from the White House.

In other developments:

Mi In Atlanta, two police officers were fired and three others were placed on desk duty over excessive
use of force during a protest arrest incident involving two college students, Mayor Keisha Lance
Bottoms said Sunday. She said she and Police Chief Erika Shields made the decision after reviewing
bodycamera footage of the Saturday night incident.

The video shows a group of police officers in riot gear and gas masks surround a car being driven by
a man with a woman in the passenger seat. The officers pull the woman out and appear to use a stun
gun on the man. They use ziptie handcuffs on the woman on the ground. The couple did not appear
to be fighting police.

In Camden, N_J., police officers were praised on social media for marching alongside protesters in
weekend rallies. Camden County Police Chief Joe Wysocki joined the front line of a march on Satur-
day afternoon, sporting his uniform, a face mask and a peace sign.

“Yesterday was another example of our ongoing engagement, and a very real dialogue, that we are
having with residents throughout Camden that has made our agency part of the fabric of this city,”
Wysocki said in an emailed statement.

M@ Cities across California declared curfews to prevent violence after demonstrators torched police
cars, broke into stores and clashed with officers in riot gear. Nearly 400 people were arrested in Los
Angeles on Saturday.

Large new protests were taking place Sunday in Huntington Beach and Santa Monica, where looters
took advantage of the situation and hit the Santa Monica Place mall and other shops.

@ In San Diego, hundreds of demonstrators marched through downtown streets chanting “George
Floyd” on Sunday and then marched on Interstate 5, blocking traffic in both directions. Although
the protest was largely peaceful, police said officers fired tear gas to disperse demonstrators who
were pelting them with rocks and bottles.

U.S. retailers, including Target, CVS, Apple and Walmart, said Sunday that they had temporarily
closed or limited hours at some locations for safety reasons. Some of their stores have been burned,
broken into or looted as protests turned violent.

Wf In Indianapolis, two people were reported dead in bursts of downtown violence, adding to deaths
reported in Detroit and Minneapolis in recent days.

@ In Austin, the state Capitol grounds were closed Sunday after they were vandalized Saturday. Pro-
testers blocked traffic on Interstate 35 for the second straight day.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200601/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. Angry demonstrators take to the streets across U.S.

At one point, officers reportedly fired rubber bullets at protesters throwing water bottles at them.
One of the rubber rounds hit a woman in the abdomen, according to the Austin Americanstatesman,
and she writhed on the ground, crying, “My baby, my baby.”

i In Houston, Mayor Sylvester Turner thanked most of the protesters for remaining peaceful Satur-
day. He encouraged people to stay home Sunday night and said he hopes a curfew is not necessary.
Houston police have reached out to Floyd’s family members to offer security as they return his body
to the city, Chief Art Acevedo said.

Mi In Arizona, Gov. Doug Ducey declared a state of emergency Sunday and announced a statewide
weeklong curfew, from 8 p.m. to 5 a.m., after several nights of protests turned destructive and vio-
lent.

Buildings around the U.S. were defaced with spraypainted messages, from the facade of St. Patrick’s
Cathedral in New York to the historic Hayadams hotel near the White House. Some of Floyd’s gasped
last words — “I can’t breathe” — were repeated, alongside antipolice messages.

“Maybe this country will get the memo that we are sick of police murdering unarmed black men.
Maybe the next time a white police officer decides to pull the trigger, he will picture cities burning.”
Lex Scott, founder of Black Lives Matter Utah

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200601/page/1/textview 4/4
