2020. 6. 17. Texas Secretary of State Ruth R. Hughs outlines her plan for voting during the coronavirus pandemic.

Texas Secretary of State Ruth R. Hughs outlines her plan for
voting during the coronavirus pandemic.

Social distancing, masks, sanitizer among the changes

The Dallas Morning News - 27 May 2020 - 1A - By JAMES BARRAGAN Austin Bureau jbarragan@dallasnews.com

AUSTIN — Texas Secretary of State Ruth Hughs on Tuesday announced the minimum rec-
ommended health protocols for elections officials during the coronavirus pandemic. Those
protocols include providing markings on the floor to designate 6 feet between voters,
making hand sanitizer readily available, and requiring workers helping voters cast their
ballots to wear face masks.

 

Hughs said in a news release that the eightpage document her office published was meant
to ensure the safety of voters, elections office personnel, polling place workers and poll
watchers. She said the guidance was a minimum, not a limit on the health protocols indi-
viduals could adopt, and said people were “encouraged” to take more precautions to pro-
tect themselves and other Texans from the virus.

Over the last two months, state officials have been under fire from the Texas Democratic
Party and voting rights groups who say an expansion of mail voting is necessary to allow
all voters to cast their ballots safely during the pandemic. Several lawsuits on the issue are
pending resolution.

State officials say an expansion of mail voting is not allowed by the plain text of the elec-
tion code and argue that other steps can be taken to ensure the safety of inperson elections.
Tuesday’s guidance is the state’s plan for how to do that.

Through the federal Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, the state received
$24.5 million to prevent, prepare for and respond to the pandemic during the 2020 federal
election cycle. Counties can apply for that money if they

need help paying for additional resources for the voting process, staffing, security and
training, communications or supplies.

The amounts awarded from that pot will be based on voter registration for the most recent
voting year and must be matched at 20% by county funds.

State Sen. Beverly Powell, DBurleson, said the state’s guidance underscored the need to al-
low expanded mail voting.

“The Secretary of State clearly states: ‘The virus that causes COVID19 is still circulating in
our communities,’ ” Powell said in a statement. “If we are serious about slowing the

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200527/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Texas Secretary of State Ruth R. Hughs outlines her plan for voting during the coronavirus pandemic.

spread of COVID19 and saving lives, we should immediately expand vote by mail in a way
that protects the integrity of the election process. Republican and Democraticled states
across America have acted swiftly to protect voters during a global pandemic and Texas
should join them.”

Curbside voting

The protocols call for polling places to provide markings on the floor that allow voters to
stay 6 feet apart from other individuals not within their household. Voting stations will be
set up 6 feet apart.

Hand sanitizer, disinfecting wipes and other disinfectants should be readily available for
poll workers and voters. Regularly touched surfaces like doorknobs, tables, writing uten-
sils, chairs, handrails and restrooms should be regularly disinfected and cleaned. Any
items that come in contact with voters should be immediately disinfected afterward.
Polling places should also have readily visible signs that outline best hygiene practices.
Elections officials should also “provide varied voting opportunities” for early voting by
extending voting hours, holding elections on weekends and publicizing the option of
“curbside voting.”

Voting rights advocate who are suing the state for expanded mail voting worry that mixing
large groups of people at polling places with a pandemic during a highinterest presidential
election year could lead to an increase in infections. They also worry that if people at high
risk of severe complications are not allowed to vote by mail, they simply won’t vote at all.
The secretary of state’s guidance calls for voters to keep 6 feet distance from others “to the
extent feasible.” Some polling locations are in small quarters, so the difficulty of main-
taining physical distance is a concern for voting advocates.

Voters will also be required to selfscreen for potential symptoms of COVID19. Voters who
exhibit any symptoms “may want to consider utilizing curbside voting” and contact their
county elections administrator to learn about eligibility for the program.

If a voter contracts COVID19 after the deadline to apply for vote by mail, the guidance says
the voter should contact a local election official to apply for an emergency early voting bal-
lot, which would allow that voter to cast a ballot in the same way as a mail ballot.

Voter requirement

Upon entering a polling place, voters will be required to wash or disinfect their hands, and
will also be required to do that after any interaction with election workers or poll watchers.
The guidance asks voters to bring their own hand sanitizer.

They will also be required to bring their own pen, pencil or stylus to use when checking in
to vote and for marking a ballot.

The state’s guidance does not require but asks voters to “consider” wearing cloth face
coverings when entering the polling place or when within 6 feet of someone who is not a
member of that voter’s household.

If an election judge can’t determine the identity of a voter, that voter should be prepared to
lower or remove their face covering to prove their identity.

Similarly, election workers are encouraged but not required to wear face coverings at all
times. They are only required to wear a face covering under two circumstances: if they are
an assistant to a voter or helping them with curbside voting.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200527/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Texas Secretary of State Ruth R. Hughs outlines her plan for voting during the coronavirus pandemic.

All election workers should be trained on appropriate cleaning and disinfection techniques.
If election workers show new or worsening signs of COVID19 symptoms, they will not be
allowed to work the elections.

An election worker diagnosed with COVID19 cannot work the elections until that person
experiences three days without a fever without the use of medication, sees improvement in
symptoms, and has gone 10 days since the disease’s symptoms were first noted.

Election workers exposed to confirmed COVID19 patients will not be allowed to work until
14 days have passed since their last exposure.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200527/page/1/textview 3/3
