2020. 6. 17. Minn. adds charges in Floyd death as protests continue

Minn. adds charges in Floyd death as protests continue

The Washington Post : 4 Jun 2020 - A1 - BY DAVID A. FAHRENTHOLD

Prosecutors in Minnesota filed new charges Wednesday against the four former Min-
neapolis police officers present when George Floyd died in custody, as protesters returned
to the streets of American cities, but a relatively calm tone prevailed early in the evening.

    

“ : ; i " 7 ce, —s
L s “ld .

The charge against Derek Chauvin — the officer who knelt on Floyd’s neck until he lost
consciousness — was upgraded to second-degree murder from third-degree, Minnesota
Attorney General Keith Ellison (D) announced. The other three officers, who restrained
Floyd or stood guard while passersby pleaded for Chauvin to stop, were charged with aid-
ing and abetting the murder.

Those charges — which an attorney for Floyd’s family called “a source of peace” — came
on a day when peace seemed to be making a comeback, at least tentatively. After a week of
aggressive use of force by police amid looting and vandalism in some cities, the tone
changed. Police in many cities hung back and even marched with demonstrators, while
protesters expelled vandals themselves.

But if the cycle of protester anger and police reaction simmered down somewhat, the Dis-
trict was an exception.

Federal officials sent a small army of National Guardsmen and federal law enforcement of-
ficers into downtown streets. The security perimeter around the White House was ex-
panded to include the area where protesters had been forcibly removed on Monday to clear
the way for President Trump to visit a fire-damaged church.

The church, and the street, were now off-limits. Federal prison guards stood watch near
the White House, looking over their riot shields at hot, quiet, mostly empty streets. A
crowd gathered near Trump’s D.C. hotel instead, mounting a peaceful demonstration.
Thousands gathered near the White House, and the crowd fell silent as somebody played
Sam Cooke’s “A Change Is Gonna Come,” a 1964 song that became an anthem of the civil

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200604/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Minn. adds charges in Floyd death as protests continue

rights era.

Some of the active-duty soldiers flown to the Washington area earlier this week had been
scheduled to return home Wednesday, but Defense Secretary Mark T. Esper canceled that
order and kept them in reserve at bases outside Washington, as first reported by the Asso-
ciated Press.

Still, Esper said Wednesday that he did not support the use of the Insurrection Act to re-
spond to the unrest caused by the Floyd’s death. That law permits the president to use ac-
tive-duty troops on American streets to bolster security, something Trump had suggested
he might do if necessary.

D.C. Mayor Muriel E. Bowser (D) said city officials were not even aware which federal agen-
cies had sent officers to Washington.

“They are under their control, not ours,” Bowser said.

When the protests erupted last week, they were focused sharply on police brutality. But
since then, Trump’s reaction — calling for more aggressiveness and “domination” against
the protesters, describing some as “thugs,” using force on peaceful protesters to clear his
own path to the photo op — has made him a target of criticism at home and abroad.

On Wednesday, former defense secretary Jim Mattis issued a statement condemning
Trump, saying he “does not even pretend to try” to unite Americans in a time of crisis.

“T swore an oath to support and defend the Constitution,” Mattis wrote, in his first major
statement about the president since resigning as Trump’s defense secretary in late 2018.
“Never did I dream that troops taking that same oath would be ordered under any circum-
stance to violate the constitutional rights of their fellow citizens.”

Gen. Mark A. Milley, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, sent amemo to U.S. military
commanders reminding them that the Constitution protects freedom of speech and peace-
ful assembly. “We in uniform — all branches, all components, and all ranks — remain
committed to our national values and principles embedded in the Constitution,” Milley
wrote.

The memo was notable not for its sentiments, since all military members swear an oath to
the Constitution, but for its timing, coming at a moment when Trump and his allies have
called for the military to crack down on demonstrators.

Trump made no public appearances Wednesday. Instead, he took to Twitter to tout his ef-
forts to help African Americans during his presidency and to issue a terse call for “LAW &
ORDER!”

In its early hours, Wednesday night was relatively peaceful — with some exceptions. In
Huntsville, Ala., police fired gas at protesters, scattering a crowd and leaving a toddler-age
girl crying, according to the news site al.com. In Brooklyn, video shot by reporters showed
skirmishes between protesters and police. In Newport Beach, Calif., a man was arrested af-
ter plowing his car through a group of protesters, though no one was seriously injured.

But many protests were uneventful. In West Hollywood, Calif., a gay pride parade was sup-
plemented by a civil rights march, with hundreds of people wearing rainbow attire and
carrying signs against police brutality.

In Philadelphia, a large march broke up peacefully after the city’s 6 p.m. curfew, as a
protest leader, Sixx King, led more than a thousand kneeling demonstrators in prayer.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200604/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Minn. adds charges in Floyd death as protests continue

“We'll be out here tomorrow,” he promised the crowd, then led them in a chant: “When?
Every day!”

In at least two cities on Wednesday, the protests triggered changes that promised to alter
their very landscape.

In Philadelphia, a crane removed a prominent statue of former mayor Frank Rizzo, a
toughon-crime politician whose tenure brought complaints of police brutality. In Rich-
mond, Virginia Gov. Ralph Northam (D) said he is planning to remove a statue of Confed-
erate General Robert E. Lee from its place on the city’s Monument Avenue, a once-un-
thinkable change in the Confederacy’s old capital.

Both statues had been targeted by protesters and tagged with graffiti. In recent days, the
city of Alexandria, Va., had removed a statue of a Confederate soldier, and Birmingham,
Ala., removed a five-story-tall Confederate monument.

In Minneapolis, Floyd’s son Quincy Mason Floyd, 27, visited the site of his father’s death
for the first time. “No man or woman should be without their father,” Floyd said.

A report by the county medical examiner released Wednesday found that Floyd had tested
positive for the coronavirus in April but was asymptomatic at the time of his death. It also
found “blunt force injuries” to Floyd’s forehead, face, upper lip, shoulders, hands, elbows
and legs.

One Minneapolis city council member said he was considering a far-reaching response:
abolishing the city’s police department and starting over.

“T don’t know yet, though several of us on the council are working on finding out, what it
would take to disband the MPD and start fresh with a community-oriented, nonviolent
public safety and outreach capacity,” council member Steve Fletcher wrote in a Twitter
thread.

That idea remains, for now, just an idea: The council has not even begun to sketch out
what would replace the current police department, or how it would be different.

In Washington, Justice Department officials said the massive law enforcement presence
has been orchestrated by Attorney General William P. Barr, who wanted to “flood the
zone” after incidents of vandalism in the early days of the protests.

But the officers have kept coming even after protests became more peaceful, and changes
made Wednesday brought the officers and the protesters much closer together. On Tues-
day, the crowds and the officers were separated by a fence and an expanse of open space;
by Wednesday, the officers came out from behind the fence and stood in the street with
riot gear.

Experts on crowd control have said that violates long-held ideas about how to handle
crowds, which teach that the first goal should be de-escalation and that heavy-handed
policing often backfires.

“The heavy hand is a smack in the face, and the danger is that it may make things worse,”
said Dennis Kenney, a professor at John Jay College in New York with expertise in police
response to protests. “It really does communicate something about where those who are in
charge think our society sits right now. We’re in the process of demonstrating to the peo-
ple who are out in the streets that they are right to be there.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200604/page/1/textview 3/3
