2020. 6. 17. Carbon dioxide levels hit a record high despite an emissions decline.

Carbon dioxide levels hit a record high despite an emissions
decline.

The Washington Post : 5 Jun 2020 - A1 - BY ANDREW FREEDMAN AND CHRIS MOONEY andrew.freedman@wash-
post.com chris. mooney@washpost.com

The coronavirus pandemic’s economic downturn may have set off a sudden plunge in
global greenhouse gas emissions, but another crucial metric for determining the severity
of global warming — the amount of greenhouse gases actually in the air — just hit a record
high.

Carbon dicide In atmosphere at record level

Mauna Lea Chsorvaiony meacured a mood monthly a orape atmos phonic
corbon diaxido concantration in May, typlorly the peek ofthe yaar.

HT. ports per
fruion &

‘SUD para peer ice j fat it

400

Apt Y -
\

h fk
I hl
La’ 1 I
=
ry
¥ a
2au5 m0 beta 3020

 

According to readings from the Scripps Institution of Oceanography and the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), the amount of CO2 in the air in May
2020 hit an average of slightly greater than 417 parts per million (ppm). This is the highest
monthly average value ever recorded, and is up from 414.7 ppm in May of last year.

Carbon dioxide levels are the highest they’ve been in human history, and likely are the
highest in 3 million years. The last time there was this much CO2 in the atmosphere, our
early human ancestors lived in Africa, global average surface temperatures were signifi-
cantly warmer, and sea levels were 50 to 80 feet higher.

The continuing rise in CO2 concentrations in the atmosphere may sound surprising in light
of recent findings that the pandemic, and the associated lockdowns, had led to a steep drop
in global greenhouse gas emissions, peaking at a 17 percent decline in early April.

But the total amount of CO2 that winds up in the atmosphere is driven not only by human
emission levels, but also through processes on the land surface (especially forests) and in
the oceans that fluctuate on a yearly basis.

According to a Scripps news release announcing the findings, CO2 emissions reductions on
the order of 20 to 30 percent would need to be sustained for six to 12 months in order for
the increase in atmospheric CO2 to slow in a detectable way.

“The buildup of CO2 is a bit like trash in a landfill. As we keep emitting, it keeps piling up,”
said Ralph Keeling, who directs Scripps’s carbon dioxide monitoring program, and whose
late father, Charles David Keeling, began measurements at the Mauna Loa Observatory in
Hawaii in 1958.

“The crisis has slowed emissions, but not enough to show up perceptibly at Mauna Loa.
What will matter much more is the trajectory we take coming out of this situation,” he

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200605/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Carbon dioxide levels hit a record high despite an emissions decline.

said.

The rate of increase of this longlived greenhouse gas in the atmosphere is accelerating.

In the 1960s, the annual growth rate was about 0.8 ppm per year. It doubled in the 1980s,
and eventually climbed to 2.4 ppm per year during the past decade. Multiple lines of evi-
dence show the cause of this increase is greenhouse gas emissions from human activities,
said Pieter Tans, who leads NOAA’S Carbon Cycle Greenhouse Gases Group.

The Scripps researchers found the average atmospheric CO2 concentration for May 2020
was 417.16 parts per million. Using different calculations than the Scripps team, NOAA re-
searchers found the peak monthly value was slightly lower, at 417.1 ppm.

The annual high typically occurs in May before CO2 levels temporarily ebb as trees and
plants in the Northern Hemisphere absorb vast quantities of the planetwarming gas during
the summer growing season. Though CO2 levels exhibit a seasonal cycle, the overall up-
ward trend is clear.

The rate of increase from last May to this May was slower than it was in the comparable
2018 to 2019 period, but natural factors such as El Nifio events in the tropical Pacific Ocean
and changes in terrestrial carbon sinks, such as forests, can have a large influence on this
from year to year, Tans said.

El Nifio events can contribute to drought and extreme heat in large areas of the world, Tans
says, noting they can weaken the ability of forests and other lands to soak up carbon diox-
ide, leading to a higher natural contribution to atmospheric CO2 levels.

The combination of record fossil fuel use and mild El Nifio conditions between May 2018
and 2019 can explain the above average increase in atmospheric CO2 of 3.5 ppm that year.
Wildfires and deforestation can add to the increase in atmospheric CO2 as well, though
their influence ultimately is overwhelmed by the global burning of fossil fuels.

According to Rob Jackson, an emissions expert with Stanford University and the Global
Carbon Project, emissions from wildfires were up in 2019 and 2020, contributing to the
May peak, as was Brazil’s land emissions due to deforestation and burning.

Because atmospheric levels of CO2 are cumulative, they will continue to increase until net
emissions are cut to zero. They will not decrease until human activities and natural
ecosystems are removing more greenhouse gases than are going into the air.

Molecules of CO2, a global warming agent, can remain in the atmosphere for up to 1,000
years.

Scientists warn that we’re on course to reach 450 ppm by midcentury, where levels would
need to stop increasing to have a decent chance of meeting the goals in the Paris climate
agreement, which seeks to limit climate change to well below 3.6 degrees (2 Celsius) above
preindustrial levels by 2100.

Kim Cobb, a climate scientist at Georgia Tech, says the new findings underscore the need
to act now. “It is a reminder that climate change is not on pause in any way, shape or
form,” she said.

Keeling says it would take a sustained drop in emissions, rather than a sudden decline re-
lated to the coronavirus pandemic, to show up more clearly in measurements of atmo-
spheric CO2. “What really matters here is setting a new trajectory,” he said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200605/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Carbon dioxide levels hit a record high despite an emissions decline.

Jackson, who conducted the analysis of emissions declines due to the pandemic with col-
leagues from the Global Carbon Project, said it’s important not to take the wrong message
from the current finding.

“We shouldn’t fall into the trap of thinking that the effect of covidi9 on emissions is trivial

or that climate progress is impossible,” he said. “It isn’t. Short-term changes in anything
are hard to detect in something as big as the atmosphere.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200605/page/1/textview 3/3
