2020. 6. 17. Officers unite with protesters

Officers unite with protesters

The Dallas Morning News - 6 Jun 2020 - 1A - By TOM STEELE , JESUS JIMENEZ, OBED MANUEL and CHARLES
SCUDDER Staff Writers

After a week of protests in Dallas highlighting police brutality and systemic racism, police
officers took to the streets Friday to join with protesters in their message that black lives
matter.

 

Some demonstrators, however, said that a display of solidarity from police isn’t nearly
enough.

Several hundred police and protesters — about a quarter of them uniformed officers —
marched from Dallas Police Department headquarters to City Hall and back. The event was
dubbed Blue for Black Lives Matter and was organized by Dallas police Officer Arturo
Martinez.

“The reason that we officers stood up is because today is the day that we finally stand up to
systematic oppression,” Martinez said. “Today is finally the day we stand up for our peo-
ple. ... When I take off this uniform I’m just another Mexican on the street.”

Although police officers marched together with protesters, for some, like Dallas social
worker Ashley Samuel, 30, the department’s actions haven’t matched its words.

Samuel was arrested Sunday evening for being out after the 7 p.m. curfew for downtown
Dallas and surrounding areas.

“Tt was absolute physiological torture,” Samuel said. “I came out to say black lives matter,
and I got held in a cell for 29 hours. I want them to be held accountable.”

‘In this together’

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200606/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Officers unite with protesters

Shortly after noon, the group knelt outside City Hall for 8 minutes and 46 seconds — the
amount of time Minneapolis police Officer Derek Chauvin had his knee on George Floyd’s
neck, killing him.

Martinez read Floyd’s last words aloud: “Please, I can’t breathe. My stomach hurts. My
neck hurts. Everything hurts. They’ re going to kill me.”

As time ticked on, Martinez asked those in the crowd if their knees hurt, if they were
thirsty and if they were tired.

“That is only a fraction of what George Floyd felt,” he said.

Among those demonstrating was Jennie Meier, 30, a surgery resident at UT Southwestern
Medical Center. With a sign that read “White coats for black lives,” Meier stayed toward
the back of the crowd in her blue scrubs and knelt.

Meier said that the hospital held a moment of silence Friday morning to honor Floyd, but
that it didn’t feel like enough and she wanted to come out to City Hall.

“We just want to make sure that we take a stand together as physicians,” she said.

Also in the crowd was Dallas Mavericks owner Mark Cuban, with his wife and children.
“We’re all in this together,” said Cuban, wearing a black face mask with a Mavericks logo
and the words “I can’t breathe” across the front.

‘We have to own it’

Most of the police taking part were people of color — only a few white officers participated.
Police Chief U. Reneé Hall, who is black, said she had to hold back tears when discussing
the video showing Floyd’s death.

“We take a knee because we feel the pain too,” Hall said. “We watched it. We have to own
it. We have to acknowledge it. We have to fix it in our respective police departments, and
we have to be committed to move forward.”

Along the march, protesters and officers — including Hall — chanted “black lives matter,”
and the names of Floyd, Breonna Taylor and Botham Jean.

The crowd stopped for a moment outside the South Side Flats, where Jean lived when he
was killed in his apartment by offduty Dallas police Officer Amber Guyger in September
2018.

‘Baby steps’

Sgt. Ira Carter, whose speech at a north Oak Cliff protest went viral on social media earlier
in the week, said the changes that activists want will require reforming the entire criminal
justice system, not just police.

“At some point in time we gotta make those that don’t feel the way we do uncomfortable,”
Carter said. “If you see any officer out there doing anything wrong, hold that officer ac-
countable. We have to be held accountable in order to go forward and make this movement
work.”

While photos and videos of officers kneeling with protesters have offered madefortv mo-
ments of reconciliation, some activists say it’s not enough. More serious action, they say,
is necessary to reform police departments.

Thursday night, for example, Hall announced a new policy that requires a “duty to inter-
vene” if officers see a fellow officer using unnecessary or excessive force. It’s one of many
steps protesters nationwide have asked for.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200606/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Officers unite with protesters

“It’s baby steps. You gotta crawl before you walk,” said Detective Terrence Savior, one of
the officers who joined the march. “People are tired. It’s what needs to happen to get
where we need to be.”

Defying curfew

In the early evening, dozens of protesters gathered in Uptown’s Cole Park.

Before marching, organizers wanted to make sure everyone had water and a mask — and
that they were registered to vote.

At first they walked along the edge of the city’s curfew zone but later ventured into the
West Village, where they engaged people sitting on restaurant patios and asked them to
join in.

Some diners remained in their seats; others stood up and raised their fists. When one
woman said she wouldn’t march, a protester replied: “If you’re not marching, you’re part
of the problem.”

“It is the hardest thing ever to be black in America,” organizer Leilani Russell, 26, yelled
outside Village Burger Bar. “You have to do everything right, and still can get killed.”

As the 7 p.m. curfew went into effect, the group blocked the intersection of Turtle Creek
Boulevard and Cedar Springs Road. A police officer in an unmarked vehicle warned them
that they could be arrested.

After about 8 minutes and 46 seconds, the group continued marching peacefully through
Uptown, stopping occasionally to block an intersection. Along the way, they drew applause
from apartmentdwellers looking down from their balconies, honks from motorists stuck in
traffic, and raised fists from passersby.

Several squad cars followed the group, but authorities didn’t arrest anyone for breaking
curfew.

Back at Cole Park, Changa Higgins of the Dallas Community Police Oversight Coalition
thanked demonstrators for taking part.

Higgins said the Police Department had overplayed its hand with aggressive tactics during
previous demonstrations — including arresting hundreds of protesters Monday on the
Margaret Hunt Hill Bridge who Hall later said won’t face charges — and “made something
hot even hotter.”

“Don’t think that what you’re doing don’t work, and that you’re not winning — ’cause
you’re winning,” he said. “And what you’re doing is changing the ideas and the minds of
the [expletive] down in City Hall, cause’ that’s what needs to change.”

Elsewhere

At least 500 people turned out for a rally in Mckinney, with Mayor George Fuller leading a
march from Ron Poe Stadium to Mckinney Square.

Many young people and families were among the diverse crowd.

“If our city doesn’t take a stand, then we’re part of the problem,” said lifelong Mckinney
resident and protest organizer Zion Maberry, 21. “We want a change.”

Demonstrators also marched through Fort Worth on Friday evening, and a studentled
event in Mansfield drew hundreds of protesters.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200606/page/1/textview 3/3
