2020. 6. 17. Trump calls for crackdowns

Trump calls for crackdowns

President vows to ‘dominate the streets,’ consider reforms

The Dallas Morning News - 12 Jun 2020 - 1A: By TODD J. GILLMAN and GROMER JEFFERS JR. Staff Writers

He blames ‘bad apples’ during Dallas talk on police and race
we Fs -

. 3 = = a
ai ~ * a
oh
= . -

 

At a discussion in Dallas on race and policing, President Donald Trump recommitted him-
self Thursday to a policy that police should “dominate the streets,” a stance that has
alarmed minority advocates fighting to tamp down the use of force after a police killing in
Minneapolis.

But Trump also expressed openness to reforms intended to reduce friction between law
enforcement and the public, and weed out officers who do abuse their power.

The White House took heat for excluding the county’s three top law enforcement officials,
who are all black, from an event that at times felt much like a campaign rally, albeit far
smaller than usual for Trump.

The president drew cheers time and again from hundreds of supporters at Gateway Church
as he forcefully rejected complaints about widespread police brutality and mocked “radical
efforts to defund, dismantle and disband the police.”

“You always have a bad ap

ple. No matter where you go you have bad apples, and there are not too many of them... in
the police department,” he said. “What happens late at night when you make that call to

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 2/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. Trump calls for crackdowns

911 and there’s nobody there? What do you? What are you doing, whether you’re white or
black or anybody else? ... There is no opportunity without safety.”

The White House defended the snub of Dallas Police Chief U. Reneé Hall, Sheriff Marian
Brown and District Attorney John Creuzot, insisting the president would still hear a diver-
sity of views.

Police Chief Vernell Dooley of Glenn Heights, a town of about 13,000 south of Dallas, urged
the president to support national standards on use of force by police, and databases on use
of force and terminations, because “we need to be able to get those bad apples out of our
industry, so what happened will never happen again.”

The visit was built around a $10 million campaign dinner at the Preston Hollow mansion of
billionaire Kelcy Warren, CEO of Energy Transfer, which built the Dakota Access crude oil
pipeline. Two dozen donors ponied up at least $580,600 per couple for a meal and souvenir
photo with Trump.

And it came amid heightened tensions nationwide since the May 25 death of George Floyd,
a black suspect pinned by the neck for nearly nine minutes under the knee of a white Min-
neapolis police officer now facing a murder charge.

‘Force with compassion’

“What happened two weeks ago was a disgrace,” Trump said — immediately adding that
protests and looting in the days that followed Floyd’s death also were a “disgrace” that
would have been averted with a more forceful response. His vision, he said, is “force with
compassion.”

Digging in on a stance that he acknowledged infuriates critics, he added that “we have to
dominate the streets,” prompting applause from an audience curated by the White House.
Trump has demanded a military crackdown on protests, boasting again on Thursday
morning about his stroll last week to a church near the White House, where he brandished
a Bible as cameras clicked, after military and federal police used pepper gas and rubber
pellets to clear protesters.

Air Force One landed at Love Field about 2:50 p.m. and departed about 7:45.

Gov. Greg Abbott greeted the president on the tarmac, along with Lt. Gov. Dan Patrick,
Texas Attorney General Ken Paxton, and West Texas congressional candidate Ronny Jack-
son, a former White House physician whom Trump tried to install as veterans secretary
two years ago.

Well over half of the 8ominute discussion was consumed by Trump and people who work
for him, including former state Rep. Scott Turner, a Frisco Republican and former NFL
player who chairs the White House Opportunity and Revitalization Council.

“That ghastly spectacle in Minneapolis was really jarring to the whole nation, and it forced
us to confront ... longstanding issues in our nation,” said Attorney General William Barr.
U.S. Surgeon General Jerome Adams, the only person onstage who wore a mask, linked
“the anger, the frustration and the fear that we’re seeing manifest in protests around the
country” to an ongoing pandemic with some of the same pathology as police brutality.
“We know that COVID19 has a tragically disproportionate burden on communities of color.
Black Americans, hospitalized at 41/2 times higher rates than whites . ... This virus is ex-
ploiting and exacerbating preexisting health disparities,” he said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 2/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. Trump calls for crackdowns

Crowds at church

Hundreds of guests attended the event at Gateway

Church’s campus in North Dallas, in one of the city’s more affluent areas.

Gateway is a conservative evangelical megachurch, one of the nation’s largest, with half a
dozen campuses in the area and a mostly white congregation. A senior White House official
rejected the suggestion that it was a strange choice for a conversation on “disparities” and
“underserved communities.”

“Everyone cares about these communities. And this is about bringing people together from
all walks,” the official said.

Democrats said Trump has little credibility on police brutality and racial strife, denying
that systemic racism even exists in law enforcement.

“This man is an agitator that purposely stokes the flames with every moment that he has,”
said Rep. Marc Veasey, whose district includes parts of Dallas. “Trump even incited vio-
lence by threatening to have protesters shot and attacked by vicious dogs and ominous
weapons and pushed for violent crackdowns, and essentially authorized a police state.”
Former Vice President Joe Biden asserted ahead of the visit that “President Trump is more
interested in photo ops than offering a healing voice as our nation mourns.”

Dallas County Democrats organized a protest near the dinner, which padded the coffers of
the Trump campaign, the Republican National Committee and 22 state parties.

“We're doing good here again,” Trump boasted at the church, predicting a win in Novem-
ber despite polls showing a tie with Biden in Texas. Jimmy Carter was the last Democrat to
win Texas, in 1976.

Although Chief Hall wasn’t invited, Fred Frazier, first vice president of the Dallas Police
Association and a member of a presidential advisory commission on law enforcement, did
participate in the roundtable, offering moving remarks about the Floyd killing and its af-
termath.

“We can’t take back what happened in Minnesota. Not one officer that saw that ... said that
was the right thing that happened. It was malice,” he said. “If I could trade places with Mr.
Floyd, I would, because I would die for everyone in this room, because that’s our job. And if
I could trade places with any one of those officers who were there, I would have done that,
too, because I wouldn’t have let that happen.”

“And I have to say this to the citizens that we serve and the citizens that are listening: We
see you. We hear you. We are with you. And we’re going to make this better,” he said.

‘Stop the tweets’

Mayor Eric Johnson declined an invitation from the White House. Other black officials in
the area were not invited, including the three Democrats in Congress who represent parts
of Dallas: Reps. Eddie Bernice Johnson and Colin Allred of Dallas, and Veasey of Fort Worth.
Allred, whose district includes the Gateway campus that hosted Trump, noted that high
rollers at the campaign dinner would get coronavirus tests from White House medical per-
sonnel that aren’t universally available at longterm care facilities or for business owners
and customers.

“This is a slap in the face to Texans and people across the country who are still struggling
because of our failure to have a national strategy,” he said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 2/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. Trump calls for crackdowns

Creuzot would have had plenty of advice for Trump, on policing and other topics: “Get a
good night’s sleep. Turn off the television, turn off the phone. Stop the tweets . ... Act ap-
propriate. Be a unifier. Not everybody’s out to get you. Not everybody needs to be at-
tacked.”

The former trial court judge said Trump has made the job of law enforcement harder with
toughsounding calls for “law and order.” Encouraging police to rough up suspects, as he
did in July 2017 when calling for a crackdown on gang violence — “Please, don’t be too
nice,” he said then — “creates doubts about the police,” Creuzot said, which makes it
harder to seat unbiased juries.

“He is showing an obvious bias toward inappropriate police conduct, which does not help
people of color feel safe, feel valued by him or the police in the area in which they live,”
Creuzot said.

Many prominent African American leaders in Dallas were not invited, despite the event be-
ing billed as a diverse gathering of faith leaders and law enforcement, among them the
Rev. Frederick Douglass Haynes III, senior pastor at the influential Friendshipwest Baptist
Church.

Citing the scene at St. John’s Church last week, Haynes said he wouldn’t want to be part of
a “dog and pony show.”

The White House did ask David Wilson, a Dallas pastor and president of the Interdenomi-
national Ministerial Alliance, if he was willing “to be vetted” to meet with the president.
He declined.

“T just can’t do it,” he said. “I really don’t want to hear the lies or be used as a prop.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 2/page/1/textview 4/4
