2020. 6. 17. Judge OKS fidinance package for Penney

Judge OKS filinance package for Penney

Terms include an ability to convert reorganization of chain into a liquida-
tion

The Dallas Morning News - 5 Jun 2020 - 1A - By MARIA HALKIAS Staff Writer mhalkias@dallasnews.com

A bankruptcy court judge approved J.C. Penney’s $900 million financing package to fund
its reorganization.

AUS. Bankruptcy Court judge approved J.C. Penney’s $900 million financing package
Thursday to fund its reorganization after testimony that basically concluded the retailer
doesn’t have time for alternatives.

Following five hours of testimony that included the prospect of lawsuits and other delays,
Judge David Jones said he had approved “more than financing. It is a path forward.”
Creditors had opposed the financing terms, which include an ability to convert the Plano-
based department store chain’s reorganization into a liquidation by midjuly.

“In a perfect world, this financing package would be highly objectionable,” Jones said.
“There’s a lot I don’t like, but I recognize that this investment may not be in a black hole.
It’s a murky hole.”

Penney filed for bankruptcy in May with $900 million in financing lined up from H/2 Capi-
tal Partners and Silver Point Capital. But another lender group that includes Aurelius Capi-
tal Management, according to a report in the Wall Street Journal ,has called that agreement
“predatory” and received the backing of Penney’s unsecured creditors.

Penney’s restructuring adviser Jim Mesterharm, managing director at Alixpartners, testi-
fied Thursday that without the new financing, Penney would run out of cash by the end of
August.

Mesterharm, who was hired by

Penney at the end of March to help the company determine its cash needs if it filed for
bankruptcy, said Penney’s cash balance had increased to $559 million as of Tuesday as it
reopened stores. But the retailer’s cash needs exceed what it can generate on its own.

The agreement provides Penney with $225 million immediately.

David Kurtz, global head of the restructuring practice at Lazard Ltd., testified that Penney
would not have had to file for bankruptcy if not for the COVID19 pandemic.

But nailing down sufficient financing after that was “by far the hardest” situation he had
experienced, said

Kurtz, who has been involved in some of the highestprofile retail bankruptcies, including
Radioshack, J.crew, Toys R Us, Gymboree and Neiman Marcus.

Potential lenders all recognized the circumstances of stores being closed and not knowing
when they would reopen, and that stores would possibly close again due to a later
coronavirus outbreak, Kurtz said. “No one had the crystal ball that would know the an-
swers.”

It also was difficult to know the value of Penney’s real estate assets in a postpandemic
world, he said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200605/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Judge OKS fidinance package for Penney

Initially there was high interest, Kurtz said. But after what he called a “robust process,”
Penney’s existing lenders were the only ones who agreed to provide financing for the
bankruptcy reorganization, which is referred to as debtorinpossession financing.
Penney’s sales performance has been better than expected so far, but the company’s sup-
pliers are apprehensive, Mesterharm said. One third of Penney’s top 100 suppliers, which
make up about 80% of its merchandise inventory, have expressed concerns about being
repaid.

“We haven’t received as much shipments as we expected,” he said.

Earlier in the hearing, a lawyer for unsecured creditors questioned the need for Penney to
even file for bankruptcy.

Penney entered bankruptcy with $450 million in cash and up to $1 billion in real estate as-
sets, said Cathy Hershcopf, an attorney for Penney’s unsecured creditors. She said ap-
proval of the financing agreement would take Penney’s fate out of the judge’s hands.

“On July 15, [debtorinpossession] lenders will decide the fate of J.C. Penney and whether
the dream lives or dies, whether there’s a reorganization plan or a liquidation,” Hershcopf
said. “This court will be powerless to help J.C. Penney.”

AJuly 15 “toggle” event, built into the proposed lending, would automatically convert
Penney into a liquidation. The agreement has another such trigger in August.

“We're asking the court to protect the creditors, vendors and employees,” Hershcopf said.
“Weve seen this picture before.”

Penney’s attorney Joshua Sussberg said that while the alternative bid sounds better, the
company’s bank — Wells Fargo, which holds a first lien on assets — wouldn’t approve it.
“We'd be embroiled in a nasty litigation and spend the next 45 days trying to keep the
company alive,” Sussberg said.

The restructuring agreement had 73% approval of first lien lenders, he said.

Penney is expected to permanently close more than 200 stores as part of its bankruptcy re-
organization.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200605/page/1/textview 2/2
