2020. 6. 17. King: lowan loses House seat, but his ideas live on in the GOP.

King: lowan loses House seat, but his ideas live on in the
GOP.

The Washington Post : 4 Jun 2020 - A1 - BY MIKE DEBONIS mike.debonis@washpost.com

The resounding defeat of Rep. Steve King at the hands of Iowa Republican voters Tuesday
signaled the political demise of one of the GOP’S most polarizing figures, an archconser-
vative culture warrior who frequently veered into outright bigotry that tarred his entire

 

The ideas King promoted, however, stand to live on inside the GOP — adopted by President
Trump and his followers, who have enthusiastically embraced and pushed forward ele-
ments of King’s agenda, none more so than sharp restrictions on legal and illegal immi-
gration.

As many Republicans cheered King’s exit from public office, they acknowledged his demise
was more about his personal controversies — which ranged from denigrating illegal im-
migrants with “calves the size of cantaloupes” from hauling drugs to associating with far-
right political figures with historical Nazi ties to defending white supremacy — than his
conservative views.

“It’s not about the ideas. It became about the person,” said Sarah Chamberlain, president
and chief executive of Republican Main Street Partnership, whose affiliated super PAC
spent $100,000 to oust King. “A lot of his ideas have been adopted by the Republican Party.
His rhetoric has not been, though.”

Even that suggestion is subject to debate: Trump has pushed the bounds of political dis-
course to unforeseen limits and made bigoted comments in private — attacking, for in-
stance, majorityblack “shithole countries” in a 2018 meeting with lawmakers — though he
has publicly courted minority voters and refrained from making public comments as obvi-
ously prejudiced as King’s.

King did not initially back Trump for president in 2016, throwing his influential support
behind Sen. Ted Cruz (R-tex.) instead during a contentious GOP primary. But King enthu-
siastically embraced Trump after he won the nomination, and Trump in turn echoed many
of King’s views on immigration — restrictionist stances that had been marginalized if not
rejected entirely inside the business-friendly GOP for years before the tea party and then
Trump rose to power.

Shortly after conceding the Republican nomination to state Sen. Randy Feenstra early
Wednesday, King posted a Facebook message that in part pointed to the mainstreaming of
his views as vindication of a job well done.

None of his primary opponents “raised an issue with a single vote

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200604/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. King: lowan loses House seat, but his ideas live on in the GOP.

I’ve put up or a single statement that I have made, and that’s pretty interesting when you
think of nearly 18 years in the United States Congress,” he said. “This comes from an effort
to push out the strongest voice for fullspectrum constitutional Christian conservatism that
existed in the United States Congress.”

The case made against King in Iowa’s 4th Congressional District was in fact not about
King’s views or even directly about his controversial comments but rather about his effec-
tiveness.

After questioning why the terms “white nationalist” and “white supremacist” should be
considered offensive in a New York Times interview last year, party leaders stripped King
of his committee assignments — including his seat on the House Agriculture panel, an im-
portant post for a district whose economy is overwhelmingly dependent on food produc-
tion.

That offered Feenstra and others an opportunity to blast King as ineffective without nec-
essarily having to directly challenge his views — an important distinction that allowed the
candidates to appeal to former King supporters without having to indict their views by im-
plication.

“T said from Day 1 that Iowans deserve a proven, effective, conservative leader that will de-
liver results ... and I promise you, I will deliver results in Congress,” Feenstra said ina
late-night Facebook video.

While the influence of King’s views are most clearly seen in the immigration realm —
where King was an early supporter of not only cracking down on illegal immigration
though physical barriers and tough sanctions on employers but on further restricting the
flow of legal immigrants — his views opposing abortion and supporting gun rights have
also been at his party’s vanguard.

King was an early supporter, for instance, of “heartbeat bills” that would ban abortions
once a fetal heartbeat can be detected. Several states passed such legislation last year, and
anticipated constitutional challenges are now working their way though the federal courts.
But his long string of racially offensive comments forced even some of his most conserva-
tive allies to keep their distance. While King protested that his Times comments had been
taken out of context, few prominent Republicans were willing to give him the benefit of the
doubt due to his long record of controversy. Just months before, for instance, King met in
Vienna with members of a far-right Austrian party with historical ties to the Nazi party
while on a congressional junket financed by a Holocaust memorial group.

Trump did not mention King in a late-night tweet offering praise to the nominee: “Con-
gratulations to Randy Feenstra on your big win in the Iowa Republican Primary. You will be
a great Congressman!”

But other Republican officials did not hold their tongue. Republican National Committee
Chairwoman Ronna Mcdaniel repudiated King in an early-morning tweet: “Steve King’s
white supremacist rhetoric is totally inconsistent with the Republican Party, and I’m glad
Iowa Republicans rejected him at the ballot box.”

Rep. Steve Stivers (R- Ohio), a former chairman of the House GOP campaign arm, thanked
Feenstra in a late-night Instagram post for defeating King. Stivers raised eyebrows in
Washington last year by rebuking King and later making an early donation to Feenstra.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200604/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. King: lowan loses House seat, but his ideas live on in the GOP.

Part of the concern about King was rooted in politics: While King won in 2016 by 22 per-
centage points over his Democratic opponent, he beat first-time candidate J.D. Scholten in
2018 by barely three points.

Scholten is again running a well-financed campaign, and many prominent Republicans
feared that King might not survive.

Chamberlain said she spoke to several Republicans who breathed sighs of relief as it be-
came clear King would lose Tuesday night into Wednesday morning. At stake was not only
a House seat, she said, but also the six electoral votes in a presidential swing state and the
reelection campaign of Sen. Joni Ernst (R-IOwa).

“Most of them would never wish ill on him; I think they just wish he had retired and gone
home,” Chamberlain said. “It’s tough to have to beat a sitting member. You know, they
don’t like to do it. But at the same time, it kind of had to be done because we could not lose
the seat to the Democrats.”

Some Republicans have avoided drawing any sweeping conclusions whatsoever, at least
publicly, including the state’s dominant Republican political figure — seven-term Sen.
Charles E. Grassley, who did not make an endorsement in the primary.

“You’re asking me to determine how tens of thousands of people voted, and I can’t answer
that for you,” he said when questioned about what motivated voters to oust King. He
praised the “very strong turnout.”

With King’s loss, two prominent nonpartisan forecasters — the Cook Political Report and
Inside Elections — moved the race from “lean Republican” to “safe Republican,” indicat-
ing Feenstra should have no trouble dispatching Scholten in a district that voted for Trump
by 27 points in 2016.

King, meanwhile, warned his fellow travelers in his concession video that his loss — fueled
by spending from the U.S. Chamber of Commerce and other outside forces — could por-
tend future setbacks.

‘What I regret is these tactics may get legs and be used against the next most effective
[conservative], then the next, then the next,” he said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200604/page/1/textview 3/3
