2020. 6. 17. Divided we stand over Dak deal

Divided we stand over Dak deal

Much like politics, people are split on proposed contract

The Dallas Morning News - 27 May 2020 - 1A - Twitter: Ksherringtondmn

Before the pandemic divided the nation, Kevin Sherrington writes, Dak Prescott’s contract
drove the wedge.

Everywhere you turn these days, someone is rejecting someone else’s numbers or science.
No one trusts anyone’s expert. Politics get blamed for the elevated level of cynicism be-
cause that’s the usual place to shop for ugliness.

But before the pandemic divided the nation, Dak Prescott’s contract drove the wedge.
Frankly, you never know which side of the Dak divide someone will fall. You have to be
careful about what you say even around people you think you know well. Doesn’t matter if
the other party is black or white or red or blue. Blood won’t tell, either. Just the other day,
one of my sons asked what I thought about Dak’s contract and the potential impact of his
demands on the Cowboys’ title hopes. Never mind that I’ve probably written more col-
umns on Dak’s employment status than anything but Texasou and Earl Thomas. I mag-
nanimously resisted the temptation to tell Ford he must not be reading his favorite writer,
then explained why it was important to get a deal done. He still gave his old man the side
eye.

Bob Sturm, who probably talks football in his sleep, is so sick of the debate over Dak’s con-
tract, he says he’d rather discuss anything else.

“Everyone who played in middle school is a QB coach,” the Ticket’s film studies expert
tweeted Tuesday, “and it doesn’t even matter if they study the topic without beers.

“This fanbase devours its young.”

The thing is, it’s not just the

locals. You’d expect a national chorus because of the Cowboys’ status as America’s Team.
But it goes beyond that. Probably helps that on ESPN you’ve got Stephen A. Smith, who
purports to hate the Cowboys, and over at Fox, there’s Skip Bayless, who thinks he in-
vented them. Stephen A. has been pretty much on Dak’s side all along. So was Skip, for that
matter, at least until the Cowboys signed Andy Dalton. Makes you think it wasn’t much of a
marriage if all it took was Andy to break it up.

Last Thursday, Chris Simms, the former Texas quarterback, got everyone stirred up when
he said he heard Dak had turned down a fiveyear $175 million deal. Which, at an average of
$35 million a year, didn’t seem far off previous reports and therefore not particularly out
of whack. Except that Dak supposedly wanted $45 million in the final year of the deal.
You’d have thought he’d tried to corner the market on ventilators. The reaction was so in-
tense, someone from Dak’s camp quickly issued a denial to sportswriters everywhere.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200527/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Divided we stand over Dak deal

Other than the enormity of a contract that would make Dak one of the highestpaid players
in NFL history, his detractors focus on two areas of concern: The occasional tee shot out of
bounds, and one playoff win in four years. Even so, if you’re going to say a guy’s not worth
what he’s asking, you ought to at least see if the numbers line up.

The most balanced analysis I’ve read comes from John Parolin of ESPN Stats & Info.
Parolin attempted to address several theories, starting with Zeke Elliott’s impact on Dak’s
success. What he found was that Dak actually has a higher QBR with Zeke off the field (71.3)
than on it (70.3). In fact, the only QB from 2016 through 2019 with at least a 71.3 is Patrick
Mahomes (78.2).

Dak’s highdollar offensive line shouldn’t get outsized credit, either. His Total QBR of 33.6
when under pressure is far above the NFL average of 21.2 and ranks seventh among quar-
terbacks with 200 or more pass plays under pressure. Over the last four seasons, the quar-
terbacks who rank behind Dak in that category include Tom Brady, Matt Ryan, Russell Wil-
son and Aaron Rodgers.

On the other hand, Dak hasn’t beaten enough good teams: 05 against 10win teams last
season.

Also, in the worstcase scenario of the pandemic’s economic impact on the salary cap next
year, a deal of $35 million could occupy as much as 22% of the Cowboys cap. The average
of the top 10 QB hits this year, Parolin reports, is 18%.

No one will argue that $170 million — with as much as $110 million guaranteed — isn’t a
lot of money. What gets lost amid the forest of dollar signs is that Dak wants a fouryear
deal and the Cowboys want five, the better to amortize the cap hit. Also to delay having to
do this all over so soon. All anyone can see, though, is the total bill. Joe Theismann was
practically apoplectic.

The former Washington quarterback questioned whether it was “worth the risk of disrupt-
ing the football team” to turn down such a deal. Then he threw in a couple of shots, saying,
“You’re a good football player. You have the potential to be better, but what have you
done?”

Former players aren’t as objective in these matters as they could be. You might think
they’d side with players because owners shortchanged them, or so they think. What you
find, more often than not, is they take out their grievances on current players instead.
Roger Staubach, a pretty staunch businessman since giving up his old magic act, concedes
Dak will make a lot more than he ever did. But he also notes that owners sock away more
than they did back in the day, too.

For the record, Roger’s a big fan of Dak’s. So is Troy Aikman. On 105.3 The Fan the other
day, Aikman not only said he’d pay him, he said he’s sure the Cowboys will do the same. He
said Dak will be the Cowboys’ quarterback “for a long, long time, and continue to have a
great career.”

Aikman also noted he’s “surprised” by all the chatter about Dak’s deal. This is the world
we live in. I just cited the two greatest quarterbacks in Cowboys history, and chances are
you don’t believe my experts, either.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200527/page/1/textview 2/2
