2020. 6. 17. Dak Prescott pledges $1M for police training

Dak Prescott pledges $1M for police training

Cowboys quarterback ends silence, calls for police accountability

The Dallas Morning News - 4 Jun 2020 - 1A - By CALVIN WATKINS Staff Writer calvin.watkins@dallasnews.com

Disgusted over the police killing of an unarmed black man, Cowboys quarterback Dak
Prescott pledges $1 million to improve police training and address systemic racism.

    

i

Cowboys quarterback Dak Prescott issued a fourpage statement against police brutality via
Instagram on Wednesday morning. Prescott offered support for the Black Lives Matter
movement and pledged $1 million to improve police training and address systemic racism.
“As a Black Multiracial American, I am disgusted and unsettled!” the opening of Prescott’s
post reads. Later he said, “I stand to make a change! I stand to see our country whole! I
stand to make our country equal! I stand to help our streets and communities trust one an-
other! I stand for black lives! I stand for love!”

Prescott’s post was liked by nearly 80,000 people, including former Cowboys teammate
Kavon Frazier who wrote in the comments: “This is big!!! Appreciate you brotha!!”
Cowboys defensive end DeMarcus Lawrence tweeted: “That’s MY QB!! Salute.”

There were more than 2,800 comments on Prescott’s post as of Wednesday evening.

Last week, Prescott’s representatives didn’t respond to a request from The News seeking
comment on the death of George Floyd, who was killed May 25 by a white police officer in
Minneapolis. The death sparked protests across the world, including Dallas, which enacted
curfews in an attempt to curtail the looting and rioting that’s hit downtown Dallas.

In his statement, Prescott mentions the pain he’s been feeling since the loss of his brother,
Jace, who died April 23, and now what has happened in Minneapolis.

“As I process the passing of my brother, I have come to realize we are not given a voice to
pronounce how much we matter,” Prescott said. “It is our obligation to tell our neighbor
how much they matter to us and take a stand for the greater good of each other.”

Prescott said he respects police officers but wants them to be held accountable when they
make deadly mistakes.

“T have the utmost respect for those of you with a passion for protecting and serving your
communities,” Prescott wrote. “When you chose to wear the badge of a police officer, you
pledged to PROTECT life and property through the enforcement of our laws and regula-
tions. How can you claim to uphold the law when those within your own ranks don’t abide
by it? You need to hold your own accountable!”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200604/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Dak Prescott pledges $1M for police training

Since the death of Floyd, other starting NFL quarterbacks have issued statements. As of
Wednesday evening, the Cowboys’ organization had yet to issue a public statement.
Prescott has always been aware of social challenges for people of color and had spoken

about those things topics in private. This is his strongest statement regarding a major
nonsports issue as the quarterback of the Cowboys.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200604/page/1/textview

2/2
