2020. 6. 17. Abbott relaxes more limits

Abbott relaxes more limits
Phase III expands capacities of eateries, bars, gyms, offices

The Dallas Morning News - 4 Jun 2020 - 1A - By ROBERT T. GARRETT Austin Bureau rigarrett@dallasnews.com

AUSTIN — Gov. Greg Abbott on Wednesday said bars, offices, nonessential manufacturing
plants and gyms in Texas could immediately begin operating at 50% capacity. Further re-
laxing coronavirus restrictions, Abbott said bar patrons will have to be seated, not stand-
ing, but can congregate in half the numbers they did before the pandemic.

=

 

Announcing Phase III of his reopening plan, the governor allowed bars and virtually every
other type of business that was restricted in Phase II to running at 25% capacity to jump to
halfcapacity if they wish, beginning Wednesday.

At restaurants, which since May 22 have been permitted to operate at 50% capacity in-
doors, Abbott said maximum table sizes immediately may jump to 10

patrons, from six.

Starting June 12, restaurants will be permitted to run at 75% capacity, he said.

“The people of Texas continue to prove that we can safely and responsibly open our state
for business while containing COVID19 and keeping our state safe,” Abbott said in a news
release.

For the first time, he let amusement parks plan on reopening, but on a staggered basis:
Theme parks in counties that have had more than 1,000 cumulative confirmed cases of
COVID19 — such as Six Flags and Sea World — won’t be able to reopen until June 19 — and
even then, at 50% capacity. Those in counties with fewer than 1,000 cases, though, such as
Schlitterbahn at both its locations, in New Braunfels and Galveston, may open at halfca-
pacity immediately.

Water parks, which Abbott allowed to reopen at 25% capacity on May 29, are allowed to
immediately go to 50% capacity under guidelines he issued Wednesday.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200604/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Abbott relaxes more limits

Swimming pools, libraries, museums, rodeos, equestrian events and sporting events —
professional, collegiate or similar — also can immediately operate at 50% capacity.
“Stadiums, whether it be where the Mavericks play or the Texas Rangers play or the Dallas
Cowboys play, will be able to seat [at] 50% capacity,” he told KDFWTV (Channel 4) Wed-
nesday.

July 4 restrictions

However, with an eye to the upcoming July 4 holiday, Abbott effectively imposed a limit of
a kind on outdoor events not otherwise covered in his latest executive order. If more than
500 people attend, the county judge or mayor — consulting with health authorities — can
impose additional restrictions.

In rural counties with 10 or fewer active cases of coronavirus, all businesses can go to 75%
capacity, starting June 12, he said.

The governor praised Texans, while urging them to continue practicing good hygiene and
social distancing, as he announced further reopenings of activities that were put on hold
by his March stayathome orders.

“As anticipated, the new positive cases that we are seeing are largely the result of isolated
hot spots in nursing homes, jails, and meat packing plants,” Abbott said.

“Thanks to the effectiveness of our Surge Response Teams, we have the ability to contain
those hot spots while opening up Texas for business.”

As he has for weeks, Abbott conditioned further relaxations on continued, voluntary coop-
eration by Texas residents.

“As we begin Phase III, I ask all Texans and Texas businesses to continue following the
standard health protocols and to heed the guidance of our state and federal officials who
continue to closely monitor COVID19,” he said.

The announcement is the latest in Texas’ march to reopen the economy amid the coron-
avirus pandemic.

The governor relaxed COVID19 restrictions for more categories of businesses and activities
16 days after saying Texas had contained the virus’ spread enough to begin Phase II of his
reopening plan.

While issuing a news release slowed reporters from asking Abbott questions about the
thinking behind his moves, the governor granted live interviews via satellite to TV stations
for early evening newscasts in Dallas and four other cities.

Speaking with KFDATV in Amarillo, which had been held back because of coronavirus out-
breaks at area meatpacking plants, Abbott was upbeat.

“All these massive stadiums like that baseball park you have in downtown can open up to
50%,” he said. “Theaters can open up. In the smaller counties around the area, they can
actually open up everything up to 75%.”

Texas has ramped up testing capabilities but is still not consistently meeting Abbott’s goal
of running 30,000 tests each day. Over the sevenday period that ended on Monday, the
state reported an average of roughly 23,500 test results a day.

Rising numbers

While Abbott has said he’s pleased that Texas has ample hospital capacity, Democrats are
quick to note that COVID19 hospitalizations remain steady — and aren’t going down.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200604/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Abbott relaxes more limits

On Wednesday, Dallas County Health & Human Services made a similar observation.

“The weekly numbers of new hospital admissions for COVID19 have not declined signifi-
cantly over the past seven weeks,” the county agency said in a daily update.

On May 18, Abbott cited the state’s total number of hospitalized COVID19 patients and the
“positivity rate” — the percentage of those given a diagnostic test who test positive — as
the two metrics that he and four physician advisers have used “to inform the state’s ongo-
ing plan to safely and strategically open.”

At the time, Abbott touted how the positivity rate — which on April 13 was nearly 14% —
had declined to under 5%.

However, according to the Texas Department of State Health Services, the positivity rate as
of Monday had crept back above 5% — to 5.4%.

That rate has jumped by more than 1 percentage point in the past week, Texas House
Democratic leaders noted.

They reiterated their belief Abbott has reopened the state precipitously, before adequate
testing was being performed and the state had ramped up “contact tracing” of people po-
tentially exposed to confirmed patients.

“On Monday, Texas saw its highest 7day average of new cases since the pandemic began,”
said Grand Prairie Rep. Chris Turner, who heads the House Democratic Caucus.

“The data are clear — unfortunately, COVID19 numbers are moving in the wrong direction
right now and we need to tap the brakes, not step on the gas.”

In his release, though, Abbott stressed that between May 26 and Tuesday, more than 45%
of new cases came from jails or prisons, meatpacking plants and nursing homes.

There are checklists for reopening on the governor’s website, though none of the mini-
mum standards laid out is a requirement. They’ re just suggestions. “Public health guid-
ance cannot anticipate every unique situation,” each of the checklists states. Use ““com-
mon sense and wise judgment,” they urge.

As of late Tuesday, 66,658 Texans had tested positive for the virus, according to state fig-
ures.

Since early March, 1,698 Texans have died at least in part because of COVID19. Late Tues-
day, there were 1,487 coronavirus patients in the hospital.

In Dallas County, the cumulative number of confirmed cases during the pandemic was
10,958 as of Wednesday. Dallas County Judge Clay Jenkins has reported 249 coronavirusre-
lated deaths in the county.

On Tuesday, Dallas County reported 257 new COVID19 cases and 16 deaths, a singleday
record for both categories. The previous high for new cases was 253 and deaths was 14.
After several days of largescale protests — in both major and midsized Texas cities — of
last week’s killing of Houston native George Floyd by Minneapolis police, the virus’ spread
could accelerate. On Tuesday, Abbott told KXXVTV in Waco that the fact many demonstra-
tors didn’t wear masks and maintain social distancing “certainly is not optimal.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200604/page/1/textview 3/3
