2020. 6. 16. CAPITAL BUSINESS

CAPITAL BUSINESS

The Washington Post - 25 May 2020 - A1 - THOMAS HEATH thomas.heath@washpost.com

Even with a sharp drop in revenue, a D.C. property management firm says it is counting on
preparation and a strong cash position to ensure its survival.

Poe Te or

 
   

   

You can bet there will be a wave of business-school case studies on how companies did or
didn’t manage the coronavirus.

Maybe Flock, Lisa Wise’s Washingtonbased property management company, will be
among them.

I wrote about Wise just a few months ago, so her 52-person company — which runs the
dayto-day operations for more than 100 condominium associations and 1,000 rental prop-
erties in the District of Columbia — was fresh of mind.

Like so many businesses, the pandemic’s toll on Flock’s bottom line was predictably sharp:
2020 revenue is projected to drop 17 percent, to $5.8 million from $7 million last year. The
profit forecast has gone from $1 million to a worst-case $245,000 loss.

The good news: Wise sees the company surviving, thanks to preparation and a solid cash
position.

“T don’t know if it was luck or brilliance, but we were totally prepared,” she said.

Flock has $1 million in government stimulus and loans in the bank. Nearly all of its pre-
coronavirus employees are still collecting full pay, though the six-member executive team
took a 5 percent pay cut. Wise took a 75 percent hit.

“Anybody whose position couldn’t be performed in this environment and could be repur-
posed was repurposed,” Wise said.

Though she initially cut the five-member maintenance staff, she has since rehired two of
them.

Every staffer has retained health-care benefits and, except for executives, the 5 percent
match on the 401(k) retirement plan remains. ( Wise is a big believer in long-term sav-
ings.)

Business is not bad. In fact, Flock is using the shutdown to expand a nascent home-repair
business — think plumbing, electrical, emergency — called Birdwatch to capitalize on

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200525/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 16. CAPITAL BUSINESS

people sitting around the house, thinking up “to-do” lists.

Flock is a holding company. Its biggest and most lucrative division is Nest, which manages
the 1,000 rentals of single-family homes and condos in the District and supplies 75 percent
of Flock’s revenue. Nest charges 90 percent of one month’s rent to find and land a tenant
and then collects a monthly management fee of 8 percent of the rent for a condo and 10
percent for a house. Nest revenue is down 40 percent so far because of the pandemic shut-
downs that have devastated the U.S. economy, but it is slowly clawing back.

Wise said the average delinquency rate on Flock apartment rentals hovered near 3.75 per-
cent in April and May, compared with 2 percent prepandemic. “Our portfolio is higher-end
properties that are typically filled with folks, for the moment at least, who are in safer,
white-collar jobs,” Wise said. “We consider ourselves very lucky because I see areas na-
tionally with delinquencies in the 30 percent range.”

Interestingly, Wise said, Nest is performing better than expected because of the effect of
the virus on human behavior.

“There have been people moving out of New York, coming to D.C., to escape the crowd and
shutdown,” she said. “There have been some breakups, couples who couldn’t live together.
Some people are moving back home.

Some are combining households to save money. Some are moving from condos into
homes.”

Wise said she and her executive team had been discussing the coronavirus threat since
early January. After hearing what happened in Wuhan, China, which shut down its city and
told everyone to stay home for weeks, they started planning.

“We saw this coming,” Wise said. “The second week of March, we started outlining a shift
from in-person workspaces to moving everybody home. We began mulling different sce-
narios and their impact on our business. How can we manage what we can’t touch?”
Money was going to be a problem, so Wise began thinking of ways to stay afloat.

They went on an austerity plan. Anything that would not affect the company’s creditwor-
thiness was game. Every recurring expense was reviewed: office food, lunches, subscrip-
tions, even the composting service were all cut. Flock delayed paying bills as long as it
could. It even held off on the property tax payment.

“T will suffer the penalty for that,” Wise said. “It’s worth it to have the cash.”

Wise, who is wired into Washington’s small business scene, said she heard early on about a
new federal program to help businesses.

Laura van de Geijn, Flock’s vice president for growth and Wise’s chief troubleshooter,
pulled financial data, tax information and anything else they thought might be required
for a federal loan application. They contacted a Crystal City, Va., bank to partner with them
on the loan. After five days of preparation, they applied for a $650,000 loan through the
Small Business Administration’s Paycheck Protection Program.

Wise checked her bank account on April 21 and saw the $650,000 deposit.

“They freakin’ delivered,” she said. “It was difficult. Rules were changing, and criteria and
documentation were changing by the hour. But the anxiety relief from the PPP funds is im-
measurable. We truly have never had so much cash in our account.”

Flock also received a $500,000 loan from the SBA disaster relief fund. At 30 years and

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200525/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 16. CAPITAL BUSINESS

3.75 percent, the loan will cost a manageable $2,700 a month, with the first payment not
due for months.

“The repayment schedule is so favorable, we went for it,” Wise said. “Maybe we turn
around and give it back, but for now it’s allowing me to sleep at night.”

After reading headlines about personal protective equipment running low and some com-
panies giving back the money, Wise said she and her team are being extra careful.

“We are being extremely cautious about the way we manage the documentation of how the
money is spent,” she said. “We can use it, and we are using it. We have taken money out of
a bank credit line as well to help meet payroll.”

Wise had to improvise so other parts of the company that do fixups and routine mainte-
nance for current and incoming tenants could keep the revenue flowing.

Ninety-five percent of the daily maintenance work is being done virtually, by either in-
structing occupants on how to unclog a sink or change a fuse on the phone or using a vir-
tual maintenance service that her tech team cooked up.

“We walk folks through their issues via Zoom/facetime/ Google Hangouts and teach them
how to change air filters, reset a garbage disposal, clear a drain, et cetera,” she said.

I asked Wise if she foresees any permanent changes in the way she manages her business
once the world gets back to normal.

“We will absolutely continue with a modified telework model,” Wise said. “We know it
works, but we know it can’t replace inperson collaboration or the work we need to do with
clients faceto-face. That said, for those wanting to reduce commutes, have more flexibility
for family and more — we can certainly see a strong future for a hybrid workplace that
works.”

She is betting the birds will not return to its two offices, Flock East and Flock West, until
January 2021.

“That’s when things will return to normal,” Wise said. “And I would put ‘normal’ in
quotes.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200525/page/1/textview 3/3
