2020. 6. 17. D.C. midweek: Curfew eases, but federal authorities tighten grip.
D.C. midweek: Curfew eases, but federal authorities tighten
grip.

City criticizes show by federal law enforcement; demonstrators relocate

The Washington Post - 4 Jun 2020 - A1 - BY HANNAH NATANSON, ANTONIO OLIVO, REBECCA TAN AND TOM JACK-
MAN hannah.natanson@washpost.com antonio.olivo@washpost.com rebecca.tan@washpost.com tom.jackman@wash-
post.com Perry Stein, Steve Thompson, Fredrick Kunkle, Samantha Schmidt, Clarence Williams, Emi

Federal authorities drew a new line in the Washington streets Wednesday, pushing pro-
testers away from the park near the White House that has been at the center of demonstra-
tions for days. For the first time, rows of military personnel stood face-to-face with the
crowd, with no physical barriers separating them.

 

The decision to eliminate access to Lafayette Square caused protesters to spread out during
the day, moving to other areas such as President Trump’s downtown hotel and the U.S.
Capitol. The sixth day of protests, which had a lighter feel with musical moments, followed
a day of relatively peaceful demonstrations, with protesters rebuking those who wanted to
hurl bottles, or abuse, at authorities.

By nightfall, a giant group was stacked up in front of the military lines on 16th Street for
two blocks. Just before 10 p.m. there was a brief moment of tension, and many of the pro-
testers left and marched toward the Capitol. But no clashes were reported, and the Dis-
trict’s 11 p.m. curfew passed with no replay of Monday’s sudden assault, when smoke, flash
explosives and pepper ball projectiles were used to eject the demonstrators from the area.
The increased federal response Wednesday frustrated both D.C. officials and crowds that
gathered to protest the police-involved killing of George Floyd in Minneapolis. D.C. police
were not involved in the showdown, and said they weren’t even entirely aware of what
agencies were now patrolling their city.

Asia Horne and Haley Mahon, in the city for their fifth day of protests on Wednesday after-
noon, said they felt they had walked into an unrecognizable version of downtown, with
police and military personnel seemingly on every sidewalk and barring every intersection.
When they tried to march with hundreds of others to the Lincoln Memorial, they found

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200604/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. D.C. midweek: Curfew eases, but federal authorities tighten grip.

that it had been converted into something akin to a military fortress, guarded by immense
ranks of law enforcement.

“T’ve only lived here three years, but I did think the nation’s capital was supposed to be
more open,” said Mahon, 21. “These national landmarks are supposed to be open to the
people.”

Mayor Muriel E. Bowser (D) and other city leaders also pushed back against the Trump ad-
ministration’s response. District leaders were unhappy with the expanded presence of fed-
eral law enforcement agencies and National Guard troops, many of whom did not have vis-
ible identification. Some refused to say where they were from. On Wednesday night, one
front line of soldiers acknowledged that they were Utah National Guard members.

“We should all be concerned about who is giving the orders,” Bowser said at a news con-
ference.

At midafternoon, the Minnesota attorney general announced an elevated murder charge
against the officer seen with his knee on the neck of Floyd last week, and charges against
the three other officers at the scene of Floyd’s arrest. Authorities were waiting to see
whether the developments lowered the temperature of protests, which proceeded with
fullthroated intensity around Washington earlier in the day.

At 4 p.m., a crowd of about 1,000 protesters marched through the city’s downtown neigh-
borhood, stopping in front of Trump International Hotel. There, they all took a knee,
blocking the intersection at Pennsylvania Avenue and 12th Street NW, as they chanted
“Black Lives Matter” and “F--Trump!” The hotel appeared empty, with a couple of first-
floor windows smashed in.

With access to Lafayette Square blocked off, a man who would identify himself only as Mo
said it would make sense for the president’s hotel to become the new focal point of
demonstrations. “We need to send a message,” he said, as the chants of more people
marching up Pennsylvania Avenue echoed in the distance. “He ain’t hearing us.”

Chef José Andrés stood handing water and sandwiches to the marchers. “Cheese sand-
wich?” he asked as people walked by, sharing thin baguettes out of a Jaleo bag. “I am a bad
thrower and you are a worse catcher,” he told one protester who dropped his water bottle
on the ground.

For the first time Wednesday, protesters could not get near Lafayette Square, the two-
blocklong expanse directly in front of the White House. On Tuesday, federal authorities
erected a ninefoot chain-link fence around the park, which created a 30-yard separation of
demonstrators from Park Police, National Guard units and federal officers packing the site.
The separation led to an uneventful night after Monday’s chaos, as District police chose
not to enforce the city’s 7 p.m. curfew, and the federal authorities took no aggressive ac-
tions.

But on Wednesday, federal officials established roadblocks with hulking military vehicles
in a oneblock perimeter in all directions around the park. The action put heavily armed of-
ficers closer to the protesters with nothing to separate them.

Two rows of soldiers in camouflage uniforms and riot gear stood shoulder-to-shoulder on
16th Street NW, where protesters had fled chemical gas and flash-bomb grenades days be-
fore, and the line at times included Federal Bureau of Prisons and Guard personnel. Some

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200604/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. D.C. midweek: Curfew eases, but federal authorities tighten grip.

carried stinger rubber ball grenades, which have been used to disperse crowds. Others
grasped pepper spray and what looked like grenade launchers for smoke explosives.
Angelique Medley, 21, was in the front row of protesters, shouting “This has to stop!”
Medley said none of the officers replied.

“T came for my dad — a black man who lived through the civil rights era,” she said. “He
taught me to challenge authority, except his.”

On Wednesday morning, after a night in which there were no clashes at Lafayette Square
and 19 arrests citywide, mostly for violating the curfew, Bowser shifted the curfew from 7
p.m. to 11 p.m.

‘We have allowed peaceful demonstrations every night,” she said. “What we are con-
cerned about are people who are not peaceful and destroying our city.”

On a sunny afternoon, people lay facedown near ornate fountains at the east front of the
Capitol, hands held behind their backs as though restrained, as Floyd was before he died.
At noon, hundreds stood in the rain at the Capitol chanting “Justice now!” and “I can’t
breathe!”

Asad Caicee, 18, had once again made the trip from the Maryland suburbs to protest the
president. But when he approached Lafayette Square, he saw that the street was blocked
off with police officers and military vehicles, making it impossible for him to even see the
White House.

So he went with the group to protest in front of the Trump International Hotel on Pennsyl-
vania Avenue. “It’s tyranny,” he said. “Our ability to protest is being violated with these
blockades.”

Numerous federal agencies and Guard members from some states have deployed around
the city. In one case, federal officers expanded a White House perimeter as far north as H
Street NW. Peter Newsham, the D.C. police chief, said he was not given advance notice of
the operation.

On Wednesday, the Ellipse was blocked off, as were 17th Street and Pennsylvania Avenue
NW.

Both Newsham and Bowser also criticized the deployment of a helicopter, which hovered
over protesters on Monday night and sent glass and other debris flying.

“It was a potentially very dangerous scare tactic that was meant to intimidate D.C. resi-
dents,” Bowser said. “It is wholly inappropriate in urban settings.”

The U.S. Park Police, who have jurisdiction over Lafayette Square and participated in the
Monday sweep against protesters, have put two officers on administrative duty as the
agency reviews their interaction with Australian reporters, acting Chief Gregory T.
Monahan said in a statement.

The two reporters from 7News were live on-air Monday when they were struck by police in
riot gear at a protest by the White House, prompting Australia’s Prime Minister Scott
Morrison to request an investigation.

Such conflict was replaced by music in many places, including at the Capitol during the
day, and on 16th Street in the evening. At 8:30 p.m., with thousands still gathered as close
as they could get to the White House, Arianna Evans strode to the heart of the crowd,

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200604/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. D.C. midweek: Curfew eases, but federal authorities tighten grip.

gripped a microphone and quieted the demonstrators. Unlike on previous nights, they fell
silent en masse, almost immediately.

Swinging her long violet braids over her shoulder, Evans, a 24year-old college student
from Maryland, began by warning anyone who wanted to loot and cause destruction to go
away. This day of protests is and will remain peaceful, she vowed: “We will flush you out,”
she told would-be troublemakers.

Then she handed the mic to Kenny Sway, a D.C. musician she’d met just hours before at
another protest on Capitol Hill. He asked the still-silent and docile crowd to sit cross-
legged, raise their cellphones, turn on the flashlights and wave the devices in the air. With
the sun setting over his right shoulder, he launched into a rendition of “Lean on Me,”
thousands of voices joining him on every chorus.

Evans sang along, too, thrilled it had all come together. They hadn’t planned it, but after
she and Sway fell into conversation at the Capitol Hill protest, he decided to follow her to
the White House with his microphone and speakers.

At nightfall, the crowd began to thin. Some drifted away, some marched to other parts of
the city.

“We should all be concerned about who is giving the orders.” D.C. Mayor Muriel E. Bowser,
on the many federal agencies on the streets

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200604/page/1/textview 414
