2020. 6. 17. Editorial: This is bigger than a few bad apples.

Editorial: This is bigger than a few bad apples.
Statistics show that systemic racism abounds in police forces

The Dallas Morning News - 3 Jun 2020 - 1A

Hard problems require tough solutions, and in the case of decades of tension between mi-
nority communities and police departments, the remedy requires all of us to acknowledge
that the problem is more pervasive than the transgressions of a few bad apples.

The bad apples narrative, while true in specific incidents, doesn’t allow for the necessary
introspection that propels broader reform.

Just to be clear, police officers have one of the toughest jobs, and those who do their jobs
with respect and dignity deserve our esteem and support for their dedication to public ser-
vice.

But consider this disquieting statistic. According to a Brookings Institution essay, African
Americans are 3.5 times more likely than white counterparts to be killed by police when
they are not attacking or don’t have a weapon. Think about that. Lethal force is more likely
to be used against Africanamericans even when they don’t pose a threat. It is for that rea-
son that Africanamerican parents have the “talk” with their children, especially male
teenagers, about the unpredictability of police encounters.

This is a cold statistic, not a mushy bad apples narrative. The awkward conclusion is that
the color of one’s skin is a determining factor in many police stops, use of force and ar-
rests. To our mind that signals a systemic problem that firing a few bad apples wouldn’t
resolve.

For example, federal investigations during the Barack Obama administration into police
practices after highprofile incidents in Baltimore, Cleveland, New Orleans, Ferguson, Mo.,
and Chicago all found massive structural and cultural problems that extend beyond the of-
ficers in a particular case. In Baltimore, the report concluded that racial disparities existed
“at every stage of BPD’S enforcement actions, from the initial decision to stop individuals
on Baltimore streets to searches, arrests, and uses of force.” And this was after controlling
for population and crime rates.

The death of George Floyd is an appropriate time for departments everywhere to reflect
and reassess. Effective policing is a twoway street. It requires community trust and support
as well as officers who work to earn it.

This is not the time to excuse or accuse. This is the time to look into police department
practices and revise those that adversely or unjustly impact communities that officers have
sworn to protect.

Every department should be reviewing officer training and tactics, with special attention
to how to deescalate situations and understanding implicit biases that everyone has. And
police officers who patrol the right way also must be willing to break the thin blue line that
too often has protected officers who should not have a badge or a gun. And this review
should not be oneanddone in response to Floyd’s death. It should be standard operating

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200603/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Editorial: This is bigger than a few bad apples.

procedure. It’s the morally right thing to do and might also prevent cities from paying set-
tlements for wrongful death or civil rights violations.

Police officers have the power of life and death and must understand that their actions in
extreme circumstances can be charged as murder. Only recently have we seen police offi-
cers charged with murder, and three of those cases occurred in North Texas. Botham Jean
and Atatiana Jefferson were shot and killed inside their homes and Jordan Edwards died
when a police officer fired at a vehicle he was in.

The moment and the opportunity to reform is before us. If we fail to seize it, we will regret
it for generations.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200603/page/1/textview 2/2
