2020. 6. 17. Austin: Liberal oasis in Texas reels from police violence.

Austin: Liberal oasis in Texas reels from police violence.

The Washington Post - 6 Jun 2020 - A1 - BY PETER HOLLEY national@washpost.com

austin — Steve Arawn remembers the moment he no longer recognized Austin, the city he
has called home for more than a decade.

   
 

The 43-year-old volunteer medic was on a grassy embankment rushing to the aid of an in-
jured protester in downtown Austin. Perched atop an elevated highway to his left, police
officers were unleashing a volley of bean bag rounds into the crowd of demonstrators sur-
rounding him.

Despite wearing a brightly colored vest adorned with red medical crosses, Arawn was shot
in the wrist and thigh, making him one of hundreds of people injured by police weaponry
during two days of protests across downtown Austin last weekend.

“The level of brutality was shocking,” an astonished Arawn said a day later, his wrist ban-
daged and his leg marked by a dark red and purple bruise. “I just couldn’t believe some-
thing like this was happening in Austin.”

The people’s republic of Austin is reeling. As protests against police brutality have swept
the nation in the wake of George Floyd’s killing in Minneapolis, the laid-back liberal oasis
in Central Texas has witnessed some of the most acute violence in the country — a devel-
opment that shocked many residents, as well as the city’s liberal leadership. At a six-hour-
long emergency city council meeting to review police protocols Thursday night, hundreds
of Austinites berated city leaders and called for the police chief ’s ouster. An editorial in the
Austin American-statesman said the police response “compounded the outrage and pain
that brought protesters to the streets to begin with.” Reached by phone, Austin Mayor
Steve Adler (D) said videos of the violence made him “incredibly uncomfortable.”

“Tt didn’t seem right,” he added.

But the shock did not extend to the east side of Interstate 35, a concrete rampart that has
for decades sliced this community in half, both physically and culturally. In traditionally
black and Hispanic neighborhoods on the city’s east side, residents said the only thing
surprising about police turning their weapons on the public is that anyone is still surprised
when it occurs.
https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200606/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. Austin: Liberal oasis in Texas reels from police violence.

“The idea that this is a progressive city is just a liberal fantasy,” said Nelson Linder, presi-
dent of the Austin NAACP.

Like the pandemic that has spread unevenly across the United States, protests over Floyd’s
death have exposed fault lines and frailties that have festered beneath the surface of cities
nationwide.

Austin police pledged this week to stop firing bean bag projectiles into large crowds after
several black and Hispanic protesters were badly injured. A 16-year-old Hispanic teenager
struck in the head and a 20-yearold black man, Justin Howell, was nearly killed by “less-
lethal” ammunition. Relatives of Howell, a Texas State University student, say doctors
have told them he has a fractured skull and brain damage.

In another instance, police shot a pregnant black woman with an “impact munition” that
left her screaming for her baby, a harrowing scene that circulated widely on social media,
unleashing fury across town.

At nightly protests outside police headquarters, demonstrators have begun holding signs
calling for city leaders to “Defund the Police.”

During a public address Monday, Austin Police Chief Brian Manley looked pained and held
back tears as he said that the incidents had left him “crushed.” But for many Austinites,
the chief ’s comments were little more than performative penance, a disingenuous exer-
cise in deflecting blame.

“T’m sad and heartbroken,” said Eugene Sepulveda, a prominent Austin philanthropist and
entrepreneur and a senior adviser to Adler, the mayor. “I have been in touch with our hired
officials and elected officials expressing very loudly that this is not the Austin we know and
love.”

The appall reflects the sense of exceptionalism built into the fabric of Austin’s psyche. Like
a blue life raft in a sea of Texas red, the taco-obsessed, music-festivalembracing city long
ago fashioned itself as a bohemian refuge for musicians, poets, intellectuals and slackers.
Even now, nearly a half century past its hippie heyday, many Austinites consider their city
more livable, beautiful and liberal than most places in America. Each afternoon, the city’s
blue-green waterways and parks fill with carefree crowds of young white people, basking
in the sun, throwing flying discs and floating on paddle boards.

“Austin is a really cool place for people that are not aware of the injustices occurring in the
world,” said Chas Moore, founder of the Austin Justice Coalition. “I tell people all the time,
Austin is white people’s Atlanta. It’s where a white person can come and fit right in and go
anywhere and see themselves.”

In the traditionally black and Hispanic neighborhoods on the city’s east side, residents de-
scribe a different reality. Only a month ago, local activists noted, Austin police shot and
killed unarmed 42-year-old Mike Ramos. At protests across the city, some black Austinites
say they’re regularly the victims of police brutality.

“I’ve lived here my whole life, and the first time I saw a cop kill someone innocent I was in
elementary school,” said Anthony

Evans, 25, referring to the death of 18-year-old Daniel Rocha in 2005. “It was traumatiz-
ing, and we can’t take these things anymore.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200606/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. Austin: Liberal oasis in Texas reels from police violence.

Rocha’s death resulted in a $1 million settlement, among more than $8 million in settle-
ments the city doled out for wrongful shooting deaths involving Austin police between
2005 and 2017, according to CBS Austin.

Even Austin protesters have been accused of racial ignorance in recent days, after the only
black-owned business on East

Sixth Street — the heart of the city’s downtown entertainment district — was looted.
“People talk about black lives matter and investing in the black community, and then they
go out and harm the only black business owner in the area,” Moore said. “(How does that
make any sense?”

Adler, the mayor, maintains that the city has made significant strides in recent years.
Among them: raising the minimum wage for city employees to $15 an hour and embracing
the Green New Deal espoused by Rep. Alexandria Ocasio- Cortez (D-N.Y.) The city created
an Equity Office to evaluate the impact city policies have on vulnerable populations. In
2018, the city council voted to make Austin the state’s first “freedom city,” a designation
tied to a set of policies that keep police from inquiring about someone’s immigration sta-
tus and decriminalize petty offenses that ensnare disproportionate numbers of minorities
in the criminal justice pipeline.

‘““We’ve been having a constant conversation for years about the things that are not work-
ing well and we’ve been able to get a lot of things done,” Adler said.

But Linder, the NAACP president, who moved to the state capital from southern Georgia in
1980, said Austin has long suffered from the same racist attitudes that defined life in the
Deep South — though less overt ones. The dissonance between perception and reality, he
said, helps to explain the bewilderment white Austinites feel when they’re forced to con-
front police violence.

“In Austin, folks pretend they’re liberal, but they’ve never dealt with these racial issues
before,” Linder said. “This city is very inexperienced in dealing with conflicts between
black people and white people, police and minorities. And if there’s any confrontation
they’re not prepared for it.”

Linder’s office is located in a traditionally black neighborhood that has been losing resi-
dents for decades, most of them forced out by skyrocketing housing prices that have ac-
companied the city’s transformation from a lazy college town and live-music mecca to an
overpriced, traffic-clogged technopolis known as “Silicon Hills.” Though they are sepa-
rated by only a few miles, there is a 10-year difference in life expectancy between the city’s
wealthy west side and poorer east side. In 2015, the Martin Prosperity Institute revealed
that Austin has the highest level of economic segregation of any large metro area in the
nation.

In downtown Austin, Russell Bangor, a 36-year-old white protester, said he felt that the
city’s economic disparities influenced whether police targeted demonstrators with high-
velocity weapons during recent protests.

“T think a lot of police will automatically assume when they aim at a black person that they
fall within a lower economic class and don’t have resources,” Bangor said. “A white per-
son, we get the benefit of the doubt. They think we might be property owners or someone
worth caring about.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200606/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. Austin: Liberal oasis in Texas reels from police violence.

In response, some white demonstrators began silently standing in front of black and His-
panic protesters when they were engaging with police, turning their bodies into shields.
“As a white person we are here to listen and use our bodies to protect and shield black and
Hispanic people,” said Danielle Reichman, 33. “I’ve seen more white people deciding to
use their privilege like that.”

Despite initiatives such as decriminalizing minor offenses, Adler said he was under no illu-
sions about the festering racial issues inside the Austin Police Department. Last year, city
manager Spencer Cronk launched an investigation into the department after allegations
surfaced that an assistant chief repeatedly referred to President Barack Obama and a long-
time black city councilwoman using the n-word.

Though a final report found no evidence of the alleged offenses in text messages, the find-
ings led some city council members to call for a radical shift in the department’s culture.
City leaders decided to delay the start of the department’s newest cadet class to make
changes to curriculum related to race, mental health and de-escalation tactics.

The idea, Adler said, was to create a curriculum that ensured officers would behave more
like “community protectors” than “warriors.”

That conversation was ongoing, Adler said, when Floyd was killed and Austin police — like
departments all across the country — found themselves in riot gear, facing off with thou-
sands of angry protesters.

“T think this is still a pretty magical place, a city of innovators and early-adopters that on
so many levels each day is doing things right,” Adler said. “I look at our city and think we
are a progressive place, but like the other cities around the country this moment has re-
vealed we have a long way to go.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200606/page/1/textview 4/4
