2020. 6. 17. Astronauts arrive at space station

Astronauts arrive at space station

NASA pilots arrive at space station after smooth linkup

The Dallas Morning News - 1 Jun 2020 - 1A + By MARCIA DUNN

Two NASA astronauts who blasted into space Saturday in the first manned launch by a pri-

vate corporation arrived at the International Space Station on Sunday.
a —, : “" i a

— aN U

           
 

No le a A

CAPE CANAVERAL, Fla. — Spacex delivered two astronauts to the International Space Sta-
tion for NASA on Sunday, following up a historic liftoff with an equally smooth docking in
yet another first for Elon Musk’s company.

With test pilots Doug Hurley and Bob Behnken poised to take over manual control if neces-
sary, the Spacex Dragon capsule pulled up to the station and docked automatically, no as-
sistance needed. The linkup occurred 262 miles above the Chinamongolia border.
“Congratulations on a phenomenal accomplishment and welcome to the International
Space Station,” Spacex Mission Control radioed from Hawthorne, Calif.

It was the first time a privately built and owned spacecraft carried astronauts to the orbit-
ing lab in its nearly 20 years. NASA considers this the opening volley in a business revolu-
tion encircling Earth and eventually stretching to the moon and Mars.

“Bravo on a magnificent moment in spaceflight history,” NASA’S Mission Control piped in
from Houston.

NASA astronaut Chris Cassidy greeted the incoming crew by ringing the ship’s bell aboard
the space station.

The docking occurred a little early, barely 19 hours after a Spacex Falcon 9 rocket blasted
off Saturday afternoon from Kennedy Space Center, the nation’s first astronaut launch to
orbit from home soil in nearly a decade.

Despite the coronavirus pandemic, thousands jammed surrounding beaches, bridges and
towns to watch as Spacex became the world’s first private company to send astronauts into
orbit, and ended a nineyear launch drought for NASA. The achievement, years in the mak-
ing, is expected to drive down launch costs so more people might be able to afford a ticket
to space in the coming years.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200601/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Astronauts arrive at space station

A few hours before docking, the Dragon riders reported that their capsule, newly named
Endeavour after the retired shuttle, was performing beautifully. Just in case, they slipped
back into their pressurized launch suits and helmets for the rendezvous.

The astronauts thanked everyone once the capsule was latched securely to the space sta-
tion. The only snag appeared to involve Dragon’s communication lines: The astronauts
could barely understand the calls coming from Houston’s Mission Control following the
linkup.

“It’s been a real honor to be just a small part of this nineyear endeavor since the last time a
United States spaceship has docked with the International Space Station,” Hurley said. He
was the pilot of that last spaceship, shuttle Atlantis in July 2011.

NASA has yet to decide how long Hurley and Behnken will spend at the space station,
somewhere between one and four months. While they’re there, the Dragon test pilots will
join NASA’S Cassidy and two Russian residents in performing experiments and possibly
spacewalks.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200601/page/1/textview 2/2
