2020. 6. 17. SPACE TRAVEL Capsule on way to historic rendezvous with space station

SPACE TRAVEL Capsule on way to historic rendezvous with
space station

SpaceX ferries two astronauts into orbit in fiorst manned launch by private
corporation

The Dallas Morning News - 31 May 2020 - 1A - By CHRISTIAN DAVENPORT and JACOB BOGAGE

With the country wracked by the coronavirus and racial strife, the United States opened a
new chapter in space exploration Saturday when a SpaceX rocket blasted off from the

Kennedy Space Center in Florida, carrying two astronauts to orbit from American soil for
the first time in nearly a decade.

   

It was a historic moment for SpaceX, which became the first private corporation to launch
people into orbit, and for NASA, which has struggled to regain its footing after retiring the
space shuttle in 2011, leaving the U.S. no option but to rely on Russia to ferry its astronauts
to space for as much as $90 million a seat.

But it also comes at the end of a historic and tragic week in America. Fatalities from the
coronavirus pandemic passed 100,000 in recent days and sometimesvi

olent protests and looting erupted overnight in major cities, including New York, Los An-
geles and Washington, D.C., over the Minneapolis police slaying of George Floyd, another
unarmed black man killed by law enforcement.

Both President Donald Trump and Vice President Mike Pence made mention of those
demonstrations in speeches to mark the new era of space travel. Trump called the launch a
unifying moment for the country, even as he called protesters “criminals” and “thugs.”
“Moments ago as we witnessed the launch of two great American astronauts into space,
we were filled with the sense of pride and unity that brings us together as Americans,”
Trump said, reading from a teleprompter. “That same spirit which powered our astronauts
to the moon has also helped lift our country to evergreater heights of justice and opportu-
nity throughout our history.

“So today as we mark a renewed commitment to America’s leadership in space — a
tremendous commitment it is — let us also commit to a brighter future for all of our citi-
zens right here on Earth.”

Both Trump and Pence praised Elon Musk, the controversial entrepreneur whose vision of
flying to Mars led him to found SpaceX nearly two decades ago. Musk himself was ecstatic
with the flight’s success. “I’m really overcome with emotion, and it’s really hard to talk

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200531/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. SPACE TRAVEL Capsule on way to historic rendezvous with space station

frankly,” he said. “We haven’t quite yet docked and of course we need to bring them back
safely, so it’s a lot of work to do. But it’s just incredible.”

Saturday’s launch was the second attempt to begin the mission. It was originally scheduled
for Wednesday, but that was scrapped because of bad weather in the area.

More bad weather threatened to jeopardize Saturday’s launch, too. The Air Force’s 45th
Weather Squadron, charged with monitoring conditions for NASA flights, predicted a 50
percent chance of prohibitive weather, including isolated thunderstorms in the area and
anvil and cumulus cloud cover.

For much of the morning and early afternoon, those conditions persisted. Showers rolled
over Kennedy Space Center just after astronauts Doug Hurley and Bob Behnken walked out
of the Neil Armstrong Operations and Checkout Building in their customfitted spacesuits.
Standing beside two Tesla Model X SUVs, the astronauts exchanged final goodbyes —
“virtual hugs,” airkisses and thumbs up — with their families.

“Are you going to be on good behavior?” Behnken asked his son, who nodded in return.
“Are you going to listen to Mommy and make her life easy?” His son nodded again.

“Let’s light the candle!” his son shouted.

Flight technicians drove Behnken and Hurley nine miles to launchpad 39A, the historic site
from which the crew of Apollo 11 left for the moon, listening to a playlist that included
AC/DC’s “Back in Black,” bossa nova standard “The Girl from Ipanema” and, finally, “The
StarSpangled Banner.”

They boarded the Dragon capsule at 12:35 p.m., as it began raining at the launch site. Those
conditions passed, though, at around 2:35 p.m., and flight engineers signaled a go for
launch.

As the flight countdown clock continued to tick, technicians fueled the two boosters of the
Falcon 9 rocket and armed Dragon’s emergency abort system. Less than an hour later,
SpaceX Flight Director Mike Taylor declared the mission go for launch, and at 3:22 p.m. —
precisely on time — the Falcon 9’s firststage engines ignited, shoving the spacecraft away
from its support beams and into the air.

Accelerating rapidly at more than twice the speed of a gunshot, Falcon 9 tore through the
humid Space Coast sky, leaving a blazing fireball and smoky trail in its wake, shaking the
Earth and unleashing a deafening roar audible for dozens of miles.

Two and a half minutes after liftoff, Falcon 9’s first booster stopped firing and separated
from the second stage, landing seven minutes later on a barge floating in the Atlantic
Ocean named “Of Course I Still Love You.”

The second stage ignited and shot the Dragon capsule toward orbit. Twelve minutes after
launch, it two dropped away — the signal that the Dragon capsule was on its way to orbit.
Raucous applause erupted from space officials at NASA facilities in Florida and Texas, and
at SpaceX’s mission control offices in Hawthorne, Calif.

“We have done it,” NASA Administrator Jim Bridenstein declared on NASA’s livestream
broadcast.

Despite repeated warnings by NASA to stay home because of the coronavirus, fans lined the
beaches to watch a historic moment, but the space agency drastically limited attendance at
the Kennedy Space Center.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200531/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. SPACE TRAVEL Capsule on way to historic rendezvous with space station

The flight was the fulfillment of a risky bet by NASA under the Obama administration to
entrust the private sector to fly astronauts, and Trump’s administration has made human
space exploration a priority.

Trump turned Air Force’s Space Command into the Space Force, its own branch of the mil-
itary, and named Pence the chairman of the National Space Council. He has pushed NASA
to conduct a lunar landing mission by 2024 as a steppingstone for a mission to Mars.
Pence has said the U.S. will return to the moon “by any means necessary.”

For SpaceX, it was the climax of an improbable odyssey that began in 2002. Musk contin-
ues to speak frequently of his goal to establish a colony on Mars and humanity’s need to be
a “multiplanetary species.”

Trump called Musk “one of our great brains,” and “a friend of mine for a very long time.”
“Congratulations, Elon,” Trump said, stepping away from the lectern to offer his own ap-
plause while the crowd at Kennedy Space Center whooped and hollered.

The Crew Dragon capsule is expected to dock with the International Space Station at ap-
proximately 10:30 a.m. (EDT) Sunday.

Sunday’s docking will be handled autonomously by the spacecraft, though Hurley and
Behnken have the ability to take over the controls manually if needed.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200531/page/1/textview 3/3
