2020. 6. 17. Virus limits easing worldwide

Virus limits easing worldwide
From Florida to Europe, visitors welcomed as lockdowns lifted

The Dallas Morning News - 2 Jun 2020 - 1A - FROM WIRE REPORTS

The first day of June saw coronavirus restrictions ease from Asia to Europe to the United
States on Monday.

a

   
   

——————

The first day of June saw coronavirus restrictions ease from Asia to Europe to the United
States on Monday, even as U.S. protests against police brutality sparked fears of new out-
breaks.

The Florida Keys welcomed visitors for the first time in two months, the Colosseum
opened its ancient doors in Rome, ferries restarted in Bangladesh, golfers played in Greece
and students returned to classes in Britain.

But even as the touristdependent Keys took down barriers to allow visitors, Miamidade
County kept its beaches closed because of protests in South Florida and across the country
over the May 25 death of George Floyd, a black man pinned at the neck by a white police
officer in Minneapolis.

Roadblocks were taken down shortly after midnight near Key Largo, the northernmost is-
land in the Florida chain, where almost half of all workers are employed by hotels, bars and
other hospitality industries, and many of the rest are involved in commercial and sport
fishing.

Richard Stanczyk, owner of Bud N’ Mary’s marina in Islamorada, said the 40 captains who
operate fishing

boats out of the 76yearold business have had virtually no customers for weeks and wel-
comed the reopening of the area to visitors.

Countries around the Mediterranean Sea also tentatively kicked off a summer season
where tourists could bask in their famously sunny beaches while still being protected by
social distancing measures from the virus marching relentlessly around the world.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200602/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Virus limits easing worldwide

“We are reopening a symbol. A symbol of Rome, a symbol for Italy,” said Alfonsina Russo,
director of the Colosseum’s archaeological park.

A long line of masked visitors snaked outside the Vatican Museums, which include the Sis-
tine Chapel, as they reopened for the first time in three months. Italy is eager to reboot its
tourism industry, which accounts for 13% of its economy.

Greece lifted lockdown measures for hotels, campsites, openair cinemas, golf courses and
public swimming pools, while beaches and museums reopened in Turkey and bars,
restaurants, cinemas and museums came back to life in the Netherlands.

The Dutch relaxation of coronavirus rules took place on a major holiday with the sun blaz-
ing, raising fears of overcrowding in popular beach resorts.

Britain, which with over 38,500 dead has the world’s secondworst death toll behind the
United States, eased restrictions despite warnings from health officials that the risk of
spreading COVID19 was still too great. Some elementary classes reopened in England and
people could now have limited contact with family and friends, but only outdoors and with
social distancing.

Mexico on Monday lifted a 70day coronavirus lockdown, but the federal and local govern-
ments replaced it with a contradictory patchwork of measures as the country struggles to
contain the outbreak.

The nation’s coronavirus czar, Hugo Lopezgatell, took a hard line, saying that federal
guidelines on opening businesses would barely budge. Only a few industries construction,
auto manufacturing and mining would be added to the list of “essential” businesses al-
lowed to operate, he said.

But several governors defied the federal government’s orders, allowing shops and hotels in
their states to open at least partially. Meanwhile, President Andrés Manuel Lopez Obrador
resumed his travel around the country with a visit to the Caribbean coast.

“We have to enter a new normality,” Lopez Obrador told a news conference. “Our national
economy, the wellbeing of our people need this.”

Central and South America are currently witnessing the most intense transmission of the
coronavirus worldwide, according to the World Health Organization. In the last 24 hours,
the WHO’S Dr. Michael Ryan said five of the 10 countries reporting the highest number of
cases are in the Americas: the U.S., Brazil, Peru, Chile and Mexico.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200602/page/1/textview 2/2
