2020. 6. 17. At King Memorial: Crowd kneels for time George Floyd was pinned.

At King Memorial: Crowd kneels for time George Floyd was
pinned.

The Washington Post : 5 Jun 2020 - A1 - BY SAMANTHA SCHMIDT, PETER JAMISON, HANNAH NATANSON AND JES-
SICA CONTRERA samantha.schmidt@washpost.com peter.jamison@washpost.com hannah.natanson@washpost.com jes-
sica.contrera@washpost.com Teddy Amenabar, Joe Heim, Justin Jouvenal, Marissa Lang, Fenit Nir

For 8 minutes and 46 seconds in the sweltering heat of a Washington summer day, hun-
dreds of people knelt on the pavement around the Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial. They
bowed their heads in silence. They marked the amount of time that George Floyd spent
with a Minneapolis police officer’s knee on his neck.

 

the uprising of the angry, exhausted and fed up showed Thursday that they are far from
finished. Protesters held a “die-in” at the White House and a march to Washington Na-
tional Cathedral. They accepted the risk of coronavirus and got drenched in a nighttime
thunderstorm. They doused their hands in sanitizer and led their children through the
crowds.

“People are listening,” said Ciyanne Zewdie, an 18-year-old high school student returning
to protest for a second day. “It’s like there’s been a knife stabbed in our back. It’s only been
moved three millimeters. It’s going to take a long time to be out all the way.”

The demonstrations have evolved drastically since Monday, when a peaceful assembly was
disrupted by an aggressive law enforcement offensive and more than 200 arrests were
made, many for looting. By Thursday, the streets surrounding the White House had be-
come an orderly ecosystem with a predictable routine and a block party atmosphere.
Hundreds of protesters gathered beside the tall fences surrounding Lafayette Square
around 4 p.m. On cue, medics started setting up first aid stations beneath trees and under
awnings, ready to receive patients in the relief- giving shade. A man unpacked a full drum
set, blue and sparkling. Someone placed cardboard boxes labeled “TRASH” and “BASURA”
on curbs. Snack stations offered water, coffee, Cheezits, sandwiches, quesadillas and voter
registration forms.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200605/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. At King Memorial: Crowd kneels for time George Floyd was pinned.

Reginald Guy arrived with a grill, a fold-up serving table and 100 hot dogs. Someone saw
him setting up and donated hamburger meat to the menu. On Friday, he planned to return
with sides and vegan options.

“This is not a granola bar moment,” Guy said just before dousing his coals with lighter
fluid. “We’re not hiking. This is not a game.”

On this night, no curfew would send the people home early. After Wednesday demonstra-
tions ended with zero arrests, police injuries or damage to police property, D.C. Mayor
Muriel E. Bowser didn’t impose another.

“Moving forward over the next couple of days, we expect more of the same,” D.C. Police
Chief Peter Newsham said Thursday.

While pleased with the continued calm, Bowser and Newsham denounced the heavy pres-
ence of federal law enforcement around the city, blocking off huge swaths of downtown
and access to many monuments. National Guard units from around the country have been
deployed to the District, along with agents from the FBI, Drug Enforcement Administra-
tion, U.S. Marshals Service and the Federal Bureau of Prisons.

Attorney General William P. Barr is orchestrating the federal law enforcement activity
from a command center in Chinatown.

“We want troops from out of state out of Washington, D.C.,” Bowser said. “I’m also con-
cerned that some of the hardening that they’re doing may be not temporary.”

Bowser and city officials had complained that federal officials expanded the perimeter
around the White House on Wednesday to include half a city block north of Lafayette
Square. By Thursday, the troops had retreated back to the square, behind the tall chain link
fence. But the fence had been extended down 17th Street and Constitution Avenue, block-
ing access to the Ellipse, the 52-acre park adjacent to the White House and maintained by
the National Park Service. Heavy concrete barriers added a second layer of protection.

As crowds assembled at Lafayette Square — smaller in number than the days before — of-
ficers stayed well back from the fencing, a marked contrast from Wednesday, when pro-
testers had spent much of the day face-toface with members of the National Guard wield-
ing shields and batons. They lounged on benches and watched a squirrel scurry past. One
pointed, gesturing to his neighbor.

“Jesus, don’t they have anything better to do,” a protester marveled.

“Our tax dollars at work,” said another.

“You know, the White House is the people’s house, and it makes me so mad we’re being
kept from it, behind this fence,” said Regina Watson, 35, who lives in Deanwood. “Our an-
cestors built that house. Brick by brick. That’s our house. Donald Trump is just a guest.”
Watson hadn’t attended the previous days’ demonstrations, when police loosed chemical
gas and rubber bullets on crowds of protesters. She was waiting for the violence to subside.
She was among many who attended the demonstrations for the first time

Thursday, either because they felt the risk of violence had subsided, or because they’d de-
cided the other risk — of contracting the coronavirus in the crowd — wasn’t enough to
make them stay home.

Jillian Ross, a 26-year-old Howard University medical student, well understood the seri-
ousness of the pandemic. But she said she was also acutely aware that when her forebears

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200605/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. At King Memorial: Crowd kneels for time George Floyd was pinned.

stood up for their rights half a century ago they also faced immediate dangers: overtly
racist elected officials, fire hoses and vicious dogs of the kind President Trump has so far
only threatened to use.

For that reason, Ross said, “it was an easy decision to come out here.”

Tuesday Cook Headley, 43, a Maryland surgeon, brought her 7-year-old daughter with her
to witness the protest and let her know that she needs to be a part of bringing about change
in the country.

Cook Headley said her daughter had been stuck at home for

nearly three months because of the pandemic.

“Weve kept her safe, but this is injustice that calls us out. We want to stay in to stay safe,
but we’re not safe when innocent black men and women are murdered in the street or in
their home,” she said. “The anger and frustration of more than 400 years of injustice to
black people in this country has become too much. It’s been too much.”

“And we’re not standing for this anymore!” her daughter interjected.

“That’s right!” her mother said with a laugh behind her mask.

Long days of repeated marches and chants seemed only to invigorate many demonstra-
tors, such as Jada Wallace, 18, who ventured downtown from Germantown, Md., three days
in a row — every time, alone.

“T want to keep on going for as long as I can,” she said. “I don’t want this urgency to go
away — even though I know it will.”

Organizers hoping to keep that day from coming soon spread the word about multiple
demonstrations planned for Saturday, hoping to attract visitors from beyond the D.C. re-
gion. And during a memorial service Thursday for George Floyd, the Rev. Al Sharpton an-
nounced plans for an Aug. 28 demonstration in the nation’s capital on the 57th anniver-
sary of the March on Washington.

“That’s where your father stood in the shadows of the Lincoln Memorial and said, ‘I have a
dream,’ ” Sharpton said, pointing to Martin Luther King III in the audience. “We need to
go back to Washington and stand up — black, white, Latino, Arab — in the shadows of
Lincoln and tell them, ‘ This is the time to stop this.’ ”

As he spoke, hundreds were on their way to do just that. Half the protesters broke off from
Lafayette Square and marched to the famous marble steps, which were blocked by barri-
cades, to kneel, chant and, like so many times before, say Floyd’s name.

At the White House, Emma Mann hoped to educate those around her about all the people
whose stories had ended like Floyd’s but who disappeared from the headlines.

The 34-year-old from Arlington printed off photos of black women reported to be killed by
police. She’d intended to print only a few but grew overwhelmed as she worked — and the
poster she held above her head Thursday was crammed with photos of 19 women.

In the upper right corner were four pictures of Mann’s cousin. Gynnya Mcmillen, 16, died
in a juvenile detention facility in Kentucky.

“What happened to her?” asked a man walking by, pointing to a face in the middle of the
poster.

“She was responding to a 911 call,” Mann said, “and police thought she was the aggres-
sor.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200605/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. At King Memorial: Crowd kneels for time George Floyd was pinned.

The man moved on, shaking his head, but Mann stayed. It was her first day out protesting
in the District. She was prepared to stay all day.

But around 8 p.m., dark clouds appeared over the White House and the Lincoln Memorial,
quickly followed by slashing strikes of lightning. Many grabbed their friends and started
running for their cars or the refuge of an awning. Some frantically searched for Lyft rides.
But dozens more stayed, even as the rain began to fall, then pelt, then soak them. On the
other side of the fence, officers used their shields for cover.

“See, now we’re making them stand in the rain!” a man told to his friend.

The YG song “F--- Donald Trump” blasted through a speaker. The protesters held up their
signs and started to dance. Now they had a new chant, for the rain, for the police, for the
country: “We’re not leaving, we’re not leaving, we’re not leaving.”

They stayed for hours. Dozens marched through the city, ending up, after 11 p.m., at the
Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial once again.

Someone turned on a speaker and began playing a recording of King’s “I have a dream”
speech.

The protesters knelt, raised their fists, and listened.

“One hundred years later, the Negro is still languished in the corners of American society
and finds himself an exile in his own land,” King said.

After the speech ended, the rain returned. The group stood up and kept marching.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200605/page/1/textview 4/4
