2020. 6. 17. Twice, president chooses division

Twice, president chooses division

The Washington Post : 30 May 2020 - A1 - BY PHILIP RUCKER AND TOLUSE OLORUNNIPA

Nobody forced the crisis in Minneapolis upon President Trump. He chose to inflame the
tinderbox himself when he issued an ultimatum to people protesting the death of a black
man there under the custody of a white police officer.

a

   

In a pair of tweets sent at 12:53 a.m. Friday, Trump threatened to deploy the National
Guard to use lethal force against demonstrators he denigrated as “THUGS.” His ominous
warning — “when the looting starts, the shooting starts. Thank you!” — was flagged by
Twitter as a violation of the social media platform’s rule against glorifying violence.
Having contributed to another national cleavage over racial justice, a president who was
elected to lead the nation through crises effectively retreated from the responsibility of
doing so on this one.

At the same time, Trump on Friday abdicated the traditional role of an American president
abroad, ceding global leadership by announcing that he was “terminating” U.S. member-
ship in the World Health Organization.

A couple of hours later, however, Trump decided he wanted to weigh in on Minneapolis af-
ter all, calling the events there “terrible” and encouraging peaceful protesters but warning
against “lawless anarchy and chaos.”

Still, Trump’s silence earlier left a mark. Three and a half years into his most unortho
President Trump’s threat Friday to involve the military more deeply in the response to
looting in Minneapolis pulled the military into a political fray over the issue, but he is un-
likely to follow through despite his authority to deploy armed forces, defense officials and
national security experts said.

The threat came in a pair of tweets from the White House during protests that escalated
into violence following the death of a handcuffed black man, George Floyd, who was
pinned down by the neck with an officer’s knee. Trump tweeted as scenes of a police sta-
tion and other buildings burning in Minneapolis aired on television amid calls for the offi-
cer’s arrest.

“These THUGS are dishonoring the memory of George Floyd, and I won’t let that happen,”
Trump tweeted, using a term with racist connotations for those involved in the looting.
“Just spoke to Governor Tim Walz and told him that the Military is with him all the way.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200530/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Twice, president chooses division

Any difficulty and we will assume control but, when the looting starts, the shooting starts.
Thank you!”

In another tweet, Trump said he “can’t stand back & watch this happen to a great Ameri-
can City, Minneapolis,” and blamed local officials there for a “total lack of leadership.”
Trump’s reaction immediately pulled the Pentagon into a crisis that already has racial and
political dynamics. It follows other incidents in which the president has politicized the
military, including the deployment of active-duty service members to the southern border,
threats to North Korean leader Kim Jong Un on Twitter and intervention into criminal jus-
tice cases.

Troops historically have been put under federal control to quell unrest only when more lo-
cal forces were unable to do so, said Lindsay Cohn, a professor at the Naval War College.
While federalized troops can be effective peacekeepers in situations where trust between
police or civilians is broken, she said, Trump’s comments indicated he wanted to use mili-
tary force in a suppression role, and are consistent with his tendency to use tough-guy
rhetoric.

“His base also tend to have very high confidence in the military and to see them as effec-
tive, so this appears to be politicized use of the idea of the military to appeal to the presi-
dent’s political supporters,” she said.

The Pentagon historically dislikes overseeing troops under federal control to handle un-
rest, preferring to leave them to the National Guard under state orders. Under federal or-
ders, Cohn noted, the Defense Department picks up the majority of the cost, rather than
the state.

Trump’s tweets had parallels to his comments about the southern border in 2018, when he
suggested that if migrants threw rocks at U.S. troops dispatched there, American forces
should act as if the rocks are rifles. After a backlash, Trump said the migrants would not be
shot.

Walz, a Democrat and retired command sergeant major in the National Guard, already had
activated guard members to assist police on Thursday, a point that Trump did not ac-
knowledge. The governor’s decision follows similar actions by other governors amid un-
rest prompted by the death of black men at the hands of police, including in Ferguson, Mo.,
in 2014, and in Baltimore in 2015.

In those cases, the guard members operated under state orders and did not have a leading
role, as government officials sought to de-escalate tensions. Under such orders, guard
members can take on law enforcement duties, but frequently do not. In Minnesota, they
will not have authority to arrest and will be armed for their own self-defense, state offi-
cials said.

Trump also has the authority to order federalized troops to Minnesota under laws such as
the Insurrection Act, which allows presidents to deploy the military domestically during
emergencies without a governor’s permission, said Stephen Vladeck, a professor at the
University of Texas School of Law.

Such actions are rare but have occurred, most recently in 1992 amid rioting in Los Angeles
after the police beating of Rodney King was recorded on video. At the time, President Ge-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200530/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Twice, president chooses division

orge H.W. Bush deployed 4,000 active-duty soldiers and Marines to complement thou-
sands of National Guard troops and police.

“This is one of those areas where I think the law is actually a lot scarier than we might like
it to be,” Vladeck said. “It’s the practical and political constraints that are the political
checks” on power.

Vladeck added that if the president deploys forces under federal orders, he would be re-
sponsible for whatever happens.

“Right now, if things go well he can say that he told Walz to do it, and if things go badly, he
can say, ‘It’s all Walz’s fault,’ ” Vladeck said.

A senior defense official, speaking on the condition of anonymity to discuss internal delib-
erations, said Defense Secretary Mark T. Esper and the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, Gen. Mark A. Milley, had spoken with Walz on Friday. The two officials “pledged to
support him in any way that he would need,” the official said. “The governor had no re-
quests at this time and the Defense Department is not sending any additional assets.”
Gen. Joseph Lengyel, the chief of the National Guard Bureau, spoke with the president on
Friday about the unrest, a defense official said. He declined to discuss internal delibera-
tions.

The Minnesota National Guard said Friday that Walz had activated about 500 guard mem-
bers, including some who were on duty Thursday night.

Peter Feaver, a scholar on civil-military relations at Duke

University, said Trump’s warning on Twitter was likely to result in a planning process
among government officials but didn’t constitute a presidential order.

Feaver noted that Bush employed active-duty troops to assist in Louisiana when local au-
thorities were overwhelmed by the scale of the destruction following Hurricane Katrina in
2005. But state authorities rejected White House requests to put the National Guard there
under federal control. The situation in Minnesota, Feaver said, does not appear to have
reached the same scale of crisis that followed Katrina.

“It does feel a little more politically opportunistic for the president to insert himself in
this,” especially when the governor is not requesting it, Feaver said.

“The use of the military by federal authorities in domestic situations, while it’s prece-
dented, it also tends to be very controversial,” he said. “It’s a politically fraught move.”
By Friday afternoon, Trump appeared to backtrack on his late-night tweets.

In a follow-up message, he recast his comment about looting leading to shooting by not-
ing that a man had been shot to death in Minneapolis on Wednesday night, and that others
had been shot in Louisville on Thursday.

“T don’t want this to happen, and that’s what the expression put out last night means,” he
tweeted. “It was spoken as a fact, not as a statement. It’s very simple, nobody should have
any problem with this other than the haters, and those looking to cause trouble on social
media. Honor the memory of George Floyd!”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200530/page/1/textview 3/3
