2020. 6. 17. ‘Maker of things’ wants to give girls a boost

‘Maker of things’ wants to give girls a boost

Software engineer Amie Dansby has a message, especially for young
women: Tech is cool, now go create something

The Dallas Morning News - 7 Jun 2020 - 1A - By HELEN BOND Special Contributor inspired@dallasnews.com

Software engineer and Lego enthusiast Amie Dansby is out there to smash stereotypes and

encourage young women to build their dreams through STEM education.
Ee ’ - Pree 7 a ~ slate xz ". Sen

 

Amie Dansby is a selfdescribed “maker of things” with an unabashed Lego crush who also
loves 3D printing and dressing in costumes.

To the Dallas software engineer’s numerous talents, you can add tech trailblazer. The 35-
yearold Dansby was the first female intern at Marvel Studios, where she worked on the
video games Captain America: Super Soldier, XMen: Destiny, Thor: God of Thunder and
Marvel Super Hero Squad. From there, she transitioned into research and development for
PlayStation and Xbox.

Fresh off a stint on Fox’s hit TV competition series Lego Masters, Dansby is using her
surging platform as a passionate technologist to smash stereotypes and encourage young
women to build their dreams through STEM education.

Online and through worldwide conferences and

workshops, Dansby teaches people of all ages to think differently about technology by
“using things for their unintended purposes,” which always involves fun — and usually
electronic soldering.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200607/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. ‘Maker of things’ wants to give girls a boost

Legos have always been a way for Dansby to relax, solve problems and have fun. As she was
homeschooled alongside four brothers, the interlocking plastic bricks were used to explain
engineering, science and history, as well as for play.

“T’m definitely a collector,” Dansby says. “I have an entire interactive wall of floortoceil-
ing base plates that I’ve hooked up to electronics with conductive paint. My house is my
workshop.”

No one ever told Dansby, who earned a degree in game programming and simulation, that
her fandom for games “wasn’t cool,” she says. Yet, growing up, she created code for
graphics under a man’s name and never wore makeup to her mostly male college pro-
gramming classes as a way to feel more respected for her work.

These days, Dansby, known for her 3D printed brick dress designs and wearable tech cos-
tume pieces and props, wants to change that narrative.

Three years ago, she created a college scholarship for women in science, technology, engi-
neering and math fields through the Friscobased National Videogame Museum. (Learn
more at nvmusa.org/ nvmscholarship.)

“It is almost like you feel you live this double life: ‘Why can’t I like makeup and also
purses?’ It is a strange thing to feel that you kind of have to become yourself. ... It took me
a while to get there, and it’s why I started the scholarship,” Dansby says. “I realized, ‘Why
am I trying to be anyone else? There is no one else I should be trying to be, but me.’ ”

Last year, Dansby engineered a way to implant her Tesla keycard microchip in her forearm
to unlock and start her car with a wave of her arm. The viral video and her Twitter profile ...
Lego armor caught the eye of Fox producers set to launch Lego Masters, based on the Bri-
tish brickbuilding realitycompetition series of the same name.

They convinced Dansby, who enlisted videogame designer Krystle Starr, to try out for the
familyfriendly reality show that showcases teams of Lego enthusiasts in wildly ambitious
themed brickbuilding challenges.

Both Dansby and Starr, a.k.a. Team Unicorn, wanted to appear authentic to viewers, and
the show didn’t let them down, says Dansby, who became friends with Starr through their
mutual affection for Legos and the character costumeplay artform of cosplay.

Starr also grew up with Lego and uses bricks in her work with adults with cognitive dis-
abilities as a regular volunteer at Planobased My Possibilities.

“We didn’t want to be edited or filmed down as this dumb, ditzy girl group,” Dansby says.
“T have a master’s in engineering and feel like I have had to work my butt off to even be
mildly respected in the tech industry. I didn’t want to go into something that I love — Lego
— and misrepresent what it could be.”

Starr says Dansby’s penchant for sharing her tech knowhow is ingrained in her friend.
“Even though this was a competition show, with thousands of dollars on the line and the
title of Lego Master, Amie could not help herself, she had to go help other teams with the
mechanics,” says Starr, laughing.

“TI think that is why we get along so well. We both love to teach. Teaching is just part of
who we are, and we are constantly learning. If you aren’t learning, you’re dying. And I
think that is a really big part of Amie.”

Team Unicorn didn’t capture the

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200607/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. ‘Maker of things’ wants to give girls a boost

Lego Masters crown, but the colorful brickbuilding duo felt the love from their biggest fans
after they were eliminated.

“Thank you ... for inspiring a little girl to dream, engineer and create,” tweeted a grateful
parent, among the flurry of messages, videos and kids’ drawings that were digitally
shared.

Dansby never imagined the show’s impact and still marvels at the response Team Unicorn
receives as “inspiring steminists” from its youngest devotees. At a Lego fan convention
earlier this year, little girls and boys dressed as fairies and dinosaurs patiently waited in a
twohour line to meet Dansby and Starr. The pair still talk daily with their new Lego family
of castmates through group chat and regularly interact online with fans.

“Tt has been a very humbling experience,” Dansby says.

Dansby’s neverending quest to push the boundaries of tech recently found her hacking a
military satellite — all in the name of space cybersecurity.

“ADDVulcan” placed fourth, out of 1,400 hacker groups, in the governmentsponsored
Space Security Challenge 2020: HackASat event.

The team’s $15,000 prize winnings will fittingly be donated to Dansby’s Women in STEM
scholarship fund.

“T originally started the team because I said I wanted pink Starfleet uniforms,” laughs
Dansby.

“T couldn’t have imagined it would have grown into having 20 of the top cybersecurity,
Ph.D. professors, security researchers, embedded engineers, astrodynamic, aerospace
engineers, science enthusiasts from all around the world. Everyone is intelligent, passion-
ate and truly will be changing the future of space and cybersecurity.”

Dansby always wants the projects she shares to spark creativity and inspire people to
change something in their lives. It’s also how she learns.

“T love it when people say: ‘You work on all these cool things — I don’t know how to do
anything like that,’ ” Dansby says. “I tell them, ‘Neither did I.’ ”

She encourages others to hack the future they want by “saying yes to doing more” based
on their own interests, be that computers, video games, fashion, movies or sports. Find a
supportive maker community to learn, ask questions and exchange ideas, and don’t get
discouraged, says Dansby, who believes “making leads to more making.”

“As I always say in my work, ‘Nothing is really failure; it is just this iterative process of
improving until you reach success.’ ”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200607/page/1/textview 3/3
