2020. 6. 16. Another round: The president tweets and plays golf.

Another round: The president tweets and plays golf.

The Washington Post - 25 May 2020 - A1 - BY ANNE GEARAN anne.gearan@washpost.com

As the death toll in the coronavirus pandemic neared 100,000 Americans this Memorial
Day weekend, President Trump derided and insulted perceived enemies and promoted a
baseless conspiracy theory, in between rounds of golf.

   

In a flurry of tweets and retweets Saturday and Sunday, Trump mocked former Georgia
gubernatorial candidate Stacey Abrams’s weight, ridiculed the looks of House Speaker
Nancy Pelosi (D- Calif.) and called former Democratic presidential rival Hillary Clinton a
“skank.”

He revived long-debunked speculation that a television host with whom Trump has feuded
may have killed a woman and asserted without evidence that mail-in voting routinely pro-
duces ballot stuffing.

He made little mention of the sacrifice Americans honor on Memorial Day or the grim toll
of the virus.

In fact, Trump’s barrage of social media attacks stood in sharp contrast to a sober reality
on a weekend for mourning military dead — the number of Americans whose lives have
been claimed by the novel coronavirus has eclipsed the combined total of U.S. deaths from
wars in Vietnam, the Persian Gulf, Iraq and Afghanistan.

Trump plans to attend a wreath-laying ceremony at Arlington National Cemetery on Mon-
day and visit Fort Mchenry in Baltimore, where the 1814 battle that inspired “The Star-
spangled Banner” was fought. The city’s Democratic mayor had discouraged the visit, say-
ing it sent conflicting messages about the importance of staying home and protecting
other Americans.

Although Trump on Friday had called for worshipers to return to church in person this
holiday weekend, the president did not. He played golf on Sunday morning.

Neither White House press secretary Kayleigh Mcenany, who had echoed Trump’s call for a
return to the pews, nor other spokespeople responded to questions about Trump’s activi-
ties on Sunday.

In the Virginia suburbs of Washington, where Trump played golf at his Trump National
club in Sterling, houses of worship could hold services with 10 participants or in larger set-
tings where participants remained in their cars.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200525/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 16. Another round: The president tweets and plays golf.

Although few churches were open in the D.C. area, a coronavirus hot spot, St. John’s, a his-
toric church near the White House that Trump has attended a few times as president, held
an online service marking Ascension Sunday.

A few protesters gathered at the golf club’s exit on Sunday, chanting “Stop killing us!” and
holding up the arresting image of the front page of Sunday’s New York Times: Rows of
names of the coronavirus dead.

Trump had also played golf at the club Saturday, the first time he had done so since early in
the pandemic. During that outing, Trump was photographed without a mask and standing
closer to golfing partners than recommended by health officials. The choice to return to
the golf course was one of the clearest symbols yet of how Trump is trying to turn the page
on a public health crisis that has damaged his standing nationally and may imperil his re-
election chances.

In a Twitter response to Trump, the campaign of presumptive Democratic presidential
nominee Joe Biden highlighted the rising death toll with images of healthcare workers
treating the sick and video of Trump playing golf as Democrats have questioned whether
the president is capable of empathy.

The White House on Saturday announced that Trump would travel next week to Florida,
his fourth trip to a political battleground state in as many weeks, as he encourages a return
to regular life and commerce in much of the country.

“Cases, numbers and deaths are going down all over the Country!” Trump tweeted, incor-
rectly, on Sunday.

New cases are declining in most of the former hot spots, including New York City, but are
“plateauing,” rather than declining, in Washington, Chicago, Los Angeles and Minneapo-
lis, White House coronavirus task force coordinator Deborah Birx told reporters last week.
After weeks of near-universal sheltering in place, the overall daily toll has begun to decline
because of a sharp decrease in deaths and reported infections in some of the hardest-hit
urban centers. But the virus is accelerating in other areas.

In 2014, Trump had criticized President Barack Obama for playing golf when there were
two confirmed cases of Ebola in the United States.

“He’s played a lot of golf, there’s no doubt about it,” Trump said then, in a telephone in-
terview with the “Fox & Friends” program, on which hosts had noted disapprovingly that
Obama had done so 200 times as president at that point, six years into his presidency.
Trump has made daytime visits to his own golf properties about 250 times in fewer than
four years as president, with evidence that he played golf on at least 118 of those occasions,
according to Trumpgolfcount.com.

Trump’s Twitter barrage on Saturday evening included crass descriptions of women
viewed as his adversaries.

Retweeting one supporter in rapid succession, Trump blasted doctored images of Pelosi
and two images of Abrams to his more than 80 million Twitter followers. Abrams, who is
under consideration as a vice presidential pick by Biden, had “visited every buffet restau-
rant in the State,” Trump’s retweet said.

“To protect Polygrip during this pandemic, we have developed 2 options. With the DJT op-
tion, she will be able to tongue and adjust her dentures more easily,” Trump retweeted,

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200525/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 16. Another round: The president tweets and plays golf.

showing doctored images of Pelosi’s face, one with a “Trump 2020” mask over her mouth
and the other with silver duct tape. “With duct tape, she won’t be able to drink booze on
the job as much. Which do you think she will prefer? #maga #tcot #kag,” Twitter user John
K. Stahl had tweeted.

Pelosi’s office has repeatedly said she does not drink alcohol.

Stahl’s Twitter profile describes him as a retired tech executive and conservative. Trump
appears to have scrolled through the account and retweeted numerous posts that praised
Trump, criticized Democrats and the news media or voiced support for Trump’s view,
which is not based on fact, that mail-in voting invites fraud.

Trump also tweeted speculation and conspiracy theories about the death of a young
woman who worked for then-rep. Joe Scarborough (R-fla.) in 2001. Scarborough is now an
MSNEC host and a frequent Trump critic. Trump suggested without evidence that Scarbor-
ough had an affair with the married staffer and that he may have killed her.

“A lot of interest in this story about Psycho Joe Scarborough. So a young marathon runner
just happened to faint in his office, hit her head on his desk, & die? I would think there is a
lot more to this story than that? An affair? What about the so-called investigator? Read
story!” Trump wrote Sunday.

Trump had also tweeted on May 12 about the death, asking, “Did he get away with mur-
der?”

Critics responded that Trump was callously forcing the woman’s family to relive her death,
and not for the first time. Trump had suggested in 2017 that there is more to the story.

At that time, The Post debunked conspiracy theories around the death of Lori Klausutis,
28.

Authorities determined that she died after losing consciousness from an abnormal heart
rhythm and collapsed, striking her head. She was discovered in Scarborough’s office in
Fort Walton Beach, on her back with her head near a desk, according to a 2001 police re-
port.

That tweet drew criticism from some conservatives, with Rep. Adam Kinzinger (R-ill.)
tweeting: “Completely unfounded conspiracy. Just stop. Stop spreading it, stop creating
paranoia. It will destroy us.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200525/page/1/textview 3/3
