2020. 6. 17. The government put the death toll at 25,000.

The government put the death toll at 25,000.

The Washington Post : 2 Jun 2020 - A1 : BY DEBBIE CENZIPER, PETER WHORISKEY AND JOEL JACOBS de-
bra.cenziper@washpost.com peter.whoriskey@washpost.com

More than 25,000 elderly residents died, and 60,000 were infected as the novel coron-
avirus swept through U.S. nursing homes in recent months, particularly affecting facilities
with a history of low marks for staffing and patient care, the Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services announced Monday.

The virus has also taken the lives of more than 400 nurses, aides and other staff in nursing
homes, the report states.

The numbers represent the first official national accounting of fatalities in the 15,000
nursing homes that receive Medicare and Medicaid funding.

The tally, however, is incomplete. Only about 80 percent of the nation’s nursing homes re-
ported data to the federal government, and they were required only to include cases as of
mid-may.

CMS officials nevertheless said they were confident the figures offer a reliable snapshot of
the pandemic in the nation’s hard-hit nursing homes.

“This represents a good picture of where we’ve been,” CMS Administrator Seema Verma
said in a call with reporters Monday afternoon.

A Washington Post accounting of cases and deaths in the nursing homes, based on state
reports since the beginning of the pandemic, shows that more than 28,000 residents have
died and 100,000 have been infected.

Of the homes that reported data to CMS, 1 in 5 recorded at least one death from covid-19,
the disease caused by the coronavirus, and 1 in 4 had at least one positive case.

In the District of Columbia and three states — New Jersey, Connecticut and Massachusetts
— more than 1 in 10 nursing home residents died, according to the data collected so far by
CMS.

An early analysis by CMS showed that nursing homes that have received poor marks for
nurse staffing and patient care were more likely to see higher case counts than those with
stronger track records. Verma announced that the agency would ramp up enforcement of
nursing homes that repeatedly violate infectioncontrol standards, including through civil
penalties.

Verma also said the agency will distribute $80 million to states to increase infection-con-
trol inspections of nursing homes during the pandemic. States that fail to inspect all Medi-
care-certified homes by July 31 will lose some of the money and will be required to submit
a corrective plan to the federal government.

For weeks, some states and facilities have declined to release case and death counts to the
public, citing privacy concerns. The new federal data, while limited, comes after months of
criticism from watchdog groups and patients’ families, who argued that tracking cases is
critical to public health.

Since the first known outbreak at a nursing home, in Washington state in February, some
states have repeatedly declined to name affected facilities or describe the scale of the prob-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200602/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. The government put the death toll at 25,000.

lem, forcing families to plead for information from homes that were often reluctant to re-
lease details.

“T think people have a right to know what’s going on — and not all this hiding,” said Toby
Edelman, a senior policy attorney at the nonprofit Center for Medicare Advocacy. “If the
nursing homes would just tell the truth, people would respect them a lot more than this
language about ‘We love our residents.’ ”

With a patchwork of reports from states, media accounts have previously placed the death
toll at nursing homes in the tens of thousands.

The estimates included all types of long-term-care facilities, such as assisted-living cen-
ters and group homes.

In April, CMS announced that all nursing homes would be required to report case informa-
tion to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention on a weekly basis. CMS requested
data by May 17 but gave nursing homes a two-week grace period to report.

Mark Parkinson, president of the American Health Care Association and the National Cen-
ter for Assisted Living, on Monday called for widespread testing.

“Today’s report validates the need for the assistance that nursing homes have been calling
for since the beginning of this pandemic,” he said. “Especially as we continue to expand
testing for residents and staff in long-term -care centers in June, we should anticipate the
number of cases to rise as asymptomatic residents and staff will be identified. While an in-
crease in these reported numbers may be startling, it will improve our ability to confront
this threat and protect our residents.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200602/page/1/textview 2/2
