2020. 6. 17. A day without sports

A day without sports
Sports fidgures can only make preparations for a return to fun, games

The Dallas Morning News - 31 May 2020 - 1A - SPORTSDAY STAFF

Members of the sports world shared what a typical day without sports looks like in the D-
FW area.

 

May typically brings one of the most eclectic offerings of sporting events to the DallasFort
Worth area.

In a good spring, Dallas sports fans might have the chance to cheer on both the Mavericks
and Stars in the playoffs. There’s also Rangers baseball, two PGA Tour events, the start of
the WNBA season and multiple collegiate and high school sports to choose from.

The world has been anything but “typical” over the last few months, though. And that has
extended to the sports landscape, too. But just because sporting events have stopped tak-
ing place doesn’t mean the entire sports world has completely stopped.

Earlier this week, the

SportsDay staff checked in on 1oplus members of the sports world — from athletes to
coaches to administrators to fans and everyone in between — to get a snapshot of what a
typical day without sports looks like in the DFW area. This is what our writers found.

Since the pandemic started, Moriah Jefferson has moved around to different Airbnbs on a
monthly basis. The Wings guard, who is from DeSoto, wants to be closer to her training fa-
cility when it opens.

In the meantime, she purchased a regulation style hoop at WalMart so she could practice in
the driveway. On Wednesday, the former No. 2 overall pick hoped to get into the gym — the
Mamba Sports Academy — for the first time so she could ditch the makeshift setup.

“It’s basically oldschool hoops, when you’re a kid,” Jefferson said. “I just had to get work
in anyway I could.”

She didn’t end up playing in the gym. But her move to Frisco this week coincides with the
hope that they’ Il soon be able to get her into play.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200531/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. A day without sports

It’s tough, though, to stay sharp on the concrete. And it’s tough, too, to stay ready fora
WNBA season that was supposed to start May 15 but is in a holding pattern.

Jefferson said she’s in communication with the Players Association and has a couple of
Zoom meetings a week with her team, but she doesn’t know more than the public.

“We really aren’t getting that much information,” Jefferson said. “... I’ve been training li...
the season’s going to start tomorrow.”

Other leagues are readying return plans, and it’s likely the WNBA is working through sce-
narios.

And hopefully, one of the best Dallasborn players of this generation will be able to trade in
concrete for hardwood and play for her hometown team.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200531/page/1/textview 2/2
