2020. 6. 17. A lot to tackle: High schools in football-mad South try to adapt.

A lot to tackle: High schools in football-mad South try to
adapt.

Championship high school coaches in football-mad South raise hope, not
fear

The Washington Post - 30 May 2020 - A1 - BY CHUCK CULPEPPER

The rhythms and rituals of American life disrupted this spring include one of the most
American of all American pursuits: high school football, that deeply cultural habit prac-
ticed fervently all around and even more fervently in the Southeast.

b

   

The novel coronavirus pandemic has closed schools and their weight rooms, nixed spring
practices that usually sprinkle across three weeks, lent a loneliness to players’ condition-
ing and jarred the college-recruiting process. But as three state championship coaches
scattered across the region spoke of their inconveniences, they tell of edification and im-
provisation.

From Georgia to Tennessee to Louisiana, realities have varied while similarities have ap-
peared. Coaches have let their hopes outweigh their fears, as ever, for a sport whose mean-
ing exceeds mere Friday nights to stretch throughout the calendar.

In eastern Tennessee, where Maryville High basks in a 17th state title as of Dec. 7, school
lunches remained available through the school year. For those players and students lack-
ing transportation to access them, 12 Maryville coaches went around delivering.

“It’s been humbling,” said Derek Hunt, the third-year Maryville head coach and former
Maryville quarterback who also runs the school bus system and knows every swatch of
pavement in Blount County yet learned still more.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200530/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. A lot to tackle: High schools in football-mad South try to adapt.

“You realize there’s poverty right next door and you might not even know it,” he said.
“The hard economic times like the coronavirus has put us in shines the light on that, and
it’s hard for those kids to fit in and hide. Number one, it’s sad, but number two, I think it
evokes a stir in our hearts. That’s been a silver lining, to realize we’ve got to do some-
thing.”

At Acadiana High in Lafayette, La., when the Wreckin’ Rams’ banquet of March 29 couldn’t
happen and the players couldn’t get their 5A title rings from having thwarted Destrehan on
Dec. 14 by the glorious throwback score of 8-3 and as some seniors began prepping to head
for the military and other ventures, the school adapted.

It held a drive-through ring ceremony.

Players and families rolled up to a circular drive May 14, lowered windows, received rings,
budged on, hopped out and posed quickly for distanced photos with coaches and educators.
“Tt was really cool,” said Cam George, a junior defensive end with a glistening grade-point
average and offers from 22 colleges from Penn to Air Force to Louisiana and back to Navy.
He arrived in a car with his parents and two siblings. “It was, you know, just cool to see
some guys again and be around some coaches.” He found it refreshing “just to be able to
say hi to some people.”

And amid a national din of appropriate misery, a voice such as that of Rich Morgan of Ge-
orgia 7A state champion Marietta High in suburban Atlanta might remind why some peo-
ple become coaches. Five months after his Blue Devils’ 17-9 win over Lowndes of Valdosta
gave Marietta its first state title in 52 years and Morgan his third in two states (counting
Virginia, with Oscar Smith), Morgan’s voice rang with a well-honed encouragement.
“Let’s face it,” he said. “We never, as kids, had to deal with anything like this. This whole
generation of kids is having to go through something we as adults never had to go
through.” In that, he found positivism essential and said, “What do these kids have to look
forward to if we don’t have this outlook?” He has made frequent use of the words, “We’re
going to get through this.”

So the champions of December 2019 have forged through the spring of 2020 while fre-
quenting Zoom or Facetime or none of the above.

Marietta football has lived and breathed in various video veins, with Morgan’s players and
coaches sometimes conducting 40-person meetings featuring players, coordinators and
position coaches, occasionally reminding participants young and less-young to “unmute”
themselves while speaking.

In Tennessee, where the school district gives each student a laptop, Hunt has opted mostly
for the elder invention of the phone call. “You see coaches doing some Zoom video, con-
ferencing with kids,” Hunt said. “I’m just not a big believer in that,” and soon he added,
“Our playbook is on the field.”

In Louisiana, Coach Matt McCullough told of “probably the longest period ever when we
didn’t see the athletes, for three months,” but said of video, “A lot of our guys don’t have
that capacity. Either they don’t have Internet, or they don’t have the Zoom meetings.”

With “right around 103 or 104 players,” he said, there’s a routine barrage of calling and
texting.

Virtual reality

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200530/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. A lot to tackle: High schools in football-mad South try to adapt.

The divide between video life and real life might ache most in that crucial aspect of Ameri-
can life, recruiting, the lifeblood that brightens or dims the moods in American college
towns desperate to beat the living hell out of various loathed rivals as well as less-loathed
others.

Acadiana’s spring practices would have brimmed with “50 or 60” college coaches, Mccul-
lough said, so all those visits have gone shoehorned into phone calls, during which McCul-
lough lends insights about players. To help with this, Mccullough credits school instruc-
tion leader Suzanne Dupuy for designing a system wherein college coaches can click a
player’s name and observe video clips, height and weight, grade-point average and tran-
scripts. Some of McCullough’s spring — and not the part when he painted his house — has
involved getting fresh video clips to college coaches, especially when they wish to see, say,
a lineman try some linebacker drills.

George, the defensive end with the 22 offers, found this reality more a workable avenue
than a burden. “I feel like [it shows] there was another way to do it,” he said. “Luckily, my
recruiting has been really great and has really taken off this spring.”

Most of the frustration, if any, might rest with the college coaches, those sticklers who
know in their bones the difference between video and reality. “Film is great,” Morgan said
from Georgia, “but everybody likes to see in person how he practices, how he interacts
with teammates. ‘How big is he really?’” For himself, he said, “The hardest part is just
getting everybody to make sure they have the correct email addresses.”

Reality has wreaked some curiosity and some worry. “Especially for the guys who rely on
the school meal program. You’re just wondering how much they’ re eating, what kind of
nutrition they have,” Hunt said.

One of Hunt’s wide receivers, Thomas Fry, feels he has thrived as well as he can even as he
misses seeing everybody. He is up Monday, Wednesday and Friday at 5:30 to lift weights at
6 at an open local gym where the trainer/owner assists mightily. On Tuesdays and Thurs-
days, Fry sees teammates at the school track, where they both run (that old verb) and dis-
tance (that new verb).

“After that, you kind of do your

“You realize there’s poverty right next door and you might not even know it. The hard eco-
nomic times like the coronavirus has put us in shines the light on that, and it’s hard for
those kids to fit in and hide. Number one, it’s sad, but number two, I think it evokes a stir
in our hearts.” Derek Hunt, football coach at Maryville High in Tennessee, who drives
meals to students in need

schoolwork whenever,” he said, pinpointing an efficiency in staying put every day: “It’s
easier compared to being in school, so you just kind of knock it out [the assignments] in an
hour, an hour and a half.”

The Maryville coaches arranged barbells and dumbbells for the players, so there will be Fry
sometimes, in his family’s front yard, lifting, neighbors shouting encouragement a time or
two.

Among teammates, “The biggest way we’ve talked is through PS4,” he said, referring to
the vital Playstation4 chat element.

Goals to go

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200530/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. A lot to tackle: High schools in football-mad South try to adapt.

Next come bits of normalcy, edging in shortly, mingled with the trappings of unforeseen
2020. At Marietta in Georgia, they plan physicals for fall sports June 1 — with full Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention guidelines such as masks. Mccullough told of the com-
ing player temperature checks in Louisiana, with anyone registering 100.4 Fahrenheit or
above U-turning for home. In Tennessee, they will get back to pads and whatnot city by
city and town by town after the state recommended school-by-school purview, with
Maryville probably among the fastest given the county’s paucity of coronavirus cases.

If all goes well, they will all see how football goes without the mainstay of spring practice,
which, as Hunt said from Tennessee, “would have been a huge deal for us, trying to see
new faces, trying to see who’s going to step up.”

Might the devoted patrons of American prep football spot more sloppiness come late sum-
mer, more penalties or turnovers, less precious?

Would anyone even care at this point?

On that topic, coaches wondered mostly about tangents. Morgan noted the difference be-
tween good shape and “full shape” born of ideal repetitions. Mccullough said from
Louisiana, ahead of workouts slated for June 8, “I don’t think there will be that big of a dif-
ference. The biggest scary thing for me is any setbacks from there,” meaning, “Once we
start, if a player gets the virus or a coach gets the virus, what happens to the rest of the
team? I don’t know what the rule is on that.”

And then, curiously, the coaches seemed to think things could go ideally even after less
coaching.

Morgan foresaw “easing into it a little bit” and “a more gradual approach,” but even with
18 seniors graduated and 16 signed at colleges (including two with national champion LSU
— tight end Arik Gilbert and outside linebacker BJ Ojulari), Morgan said, “We’ll be fine.”
And said Hunt: “I might be in the minority here. I don’t think there will be a huge differ-
ence. I really do not. I think as coaches, our egos get in the way. We think we’re maybe a
little better than we are. Kids win games, man.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200530/page/1/textview 4/4
