2020. 6. 17. Jacksonville appears to have inside track for convention

Jacksonville appears to have inside track for convention
Party searching for city that won’t restrict size of crowd during events

The Dallas Morning News - 11 Jun 2020 - 1A - By BOBCAINA CALVAN and JILL COLVIN

 

TALLAHASSEE, Fla. — Jacksonville is the frontrunner to host the GOP celebration marking
President Donald Trump’s acceptance of his party’s nomination for reelection, the Repub-
lican National Committee chairwoman said Wednesday.

Ronna Mcdaniel said reports of a final decision were “definitely premature.” But she made
clear that Jacksonville is the favorite now that Charlotte, N.C., the official host of this sum-
mer’s Republican National Convention, has balked on promising Trump a fullblown con-
vention free from social distancing measures during the coronavirus pandemic.

“There’s a couple more things we need to do before we can announce that, but Jacksonville
is absolutely in the frontrunning position,” she said in an interview with conservative ra-
dio host Hugh Hewitt.

But a Republican familiar with the negotiations insisted that the RNC was considering sev-
eral cities and that no final decision had been made. Siteselection teams were visiting other
locations being considered for the event, including Phoenix, Savannah, Ga., and Dallas, ac-
cording to party officials who were not authorized to publicly discuss internal delibera-
tions and spoke on the condition of anonymity.

There were indications that plans were moving forward in Jacksonville.

Hotel rooms, for instance, have been blocked off for late August — a week after the state’s
Aug. 18 primary — intensifying speculation.

The RNC has spent the last week scouting locations after North Carolina Gov. Roy Cooper
rejected Trump’s demand that the convention be allowed to take place without social dis-
tancing measures.

“Shame on him, because he put politics over the people of his state and revenues coming
into his state,” Mcdaniel said in the radio interview. “So it’s sad. We’re moving forward.”
White House press secretary Kayleigh Mcenany said in an earlier interview with Fox News
Channel that Trump was “very frustrated with the politically motivated governor of North

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 1/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Jacksonville appears to have inside track for convention

Carolina who is not doing what’s in the best interest of his state, which is to bring eco-
nomic boom and economic activity and the great resources that would come with holding a
convention.”

Cooper has stressed his desire to keep residents in his state safe from the coronavirus.

His press secretary, Dory MacMillan, said Wednesday that North Carolina officials have
been “willing to work together with the RNC on a scaleddown event with health and safety
measures, but it wouldn’t be responsible to guarantee a full arena as the

RNC has demanded.”

The Jacksonville area, home to a major military base, has a population of about 1.5 million.
Mayor Len Curry is a former chair of the state Republican Party, and the area is the home
base of GOP Gov. Ron Desantis, a key Trump ally.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 1/page/1/textview 2/2
