2020. 6. 17. Suspect dies in shootout with police

Suspect dies in shootout with police
Dad says 26yearold had mental illness

The Dallas Morning News - 12 Jun 2020 - 1A - MASON JAMES LIRA

   
  

Father says son, 26, was ill, “in a fantasy world.”
io ee 4 At Dy

Th er

 

a ee —_ i. ee
a - — mere

LOS ANGELES — The man suspected of ambushing and shooting a California sheriff's
deputy is dead after a shootout with police, authorities said Thursday.

Mason James Lira, 26, was accused of ambushing and seriously injuring a San Luis Obispo
sheriff ’s deputy and killing a transient man Wednesday in Paso Robles. The attacks set off
a massive manhunt along the central California coast that ended Thursday in the shootout.
While Tony Cipolla, a San Luis Obispo County sheriff’s spokesman, confirmed Lira’s death,
the surrounding details were not immediately available.

Three officers were injured as police attempted to take Lira into custody Thursday after-
noon at a chaotic scene in a riverbed, with residents in a 2mile radius locked down.

An Arroyo Grande officer was struck by gunfire, while officers with the California Highway
Patrol and Kings County Sheriff ’s Office suffered unspecified wounds. All three are ex-
pected to survive their injuries.

The manhunt for Lira began at dawn Wednesday, when authorities said he opened fire on
the Paso Robles police station. Two sheriff’s deputies heard gunshots and responded but
didn’t see the attacker until they were outside their patrol car and under fire.

Deputy Nicholas Dreyfus, 28, was hit in the face. His partner fired back and dragged Drey-
fus behind a police car. Dreyfus, who was able to radio that he’d been shot, underwent
surgery Thursday and was in guarded condition.

While scores of officers searched for Lira, they received a report of a body near a train sta-
tion and found a 58yearold man shot to death on the tracks. He appeared to be a transient
who was camping out overnight. Police believe Lira was responsible for the killing.

Lira’s father said he thinks the shooting at the police station might have been a suicide at-
tempt.

Jose Lira said his son had been diagnosed with schizophrenia, Asperger’s syndrome and
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. He said his son has been in and out of jail and
treatment centers, and often thinks he is a special agent or a soldier.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 2/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Suspect dies in shootout with police
“He lives in a fantasy world,” Jose Lira said. “He doesn’t have a beef with the police.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 2/page/1/textview

2/2
