2020. 6. 17. A Texas bonus?

A Texas bonus?

Abbott allowing up to 50% capacity could benefitt Rangers

The Dallas Morning News - 5 Jun 2020 - 1A - By EVAN GRANT Staff writer egrant@dallasnews.com

The Rangers could have a major fan advantage if Major League Baseball finds a way to have
a season this year, Evan Grant writes.
i See

= | a jm a eh ti ass

   
 

 

As Major League Baseball and its Players Association wobble toward an agreement to start
the Covidigdelayed season, the Rangers could be handed a huge advantage if the schedule
ever gets underway: fans.

According to two major league sources Thursday, MLB is inclined to allow local and mu-
nicipal governance to take precedence when it comes to allowing fan attendance at games.
On Wednesday, Gov. Greg Abbott announced that Texasbased teams could now allow at-
tendance up to 50% of stadium capacity. The announcement was an expansion of the
state’s previous policy of 25%, which had been in effect for two weeks, but had not yet
been tested by any league. All plans would also be subject to change based on health and
safety protocols.

Texas is the only state to have opened to pro sports with fans, though some other states
have indicated they would consider adjusting their stances as they meet various thresholds
in containing the coronavirus

outbreak. Texas is home to two MLB teams, the Rangers and Houston Astros.

“The Texas Rangers are looking forward to the potential of returning to play in 2020,” the
team said in a statement after it was initially announced that Texas would open. “Major
League Baseball and the Major League Baseball Players Association are having ongoing
discussions about that possibility at the present time, and the Rangers are in the process of
operational planning for if and when we have a spring training and regular season games
at Globe Life Field. The health and safety of our players, staff, and fans are a top priority,
and we will await further information and guidance from Major League Baseball and the
appropriate health authorities in the coming days and weeks.”

MLB’S position is significant on two levels. The first is that it could create something of an
unequal homefield advantage for those teams that do allow fans. The second: It could po-
tentially create additional revenues that owners would be willing to share with players in
the 5050 revenue split the league proposed to the MLBPA when negotiations started. The

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200605/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. A Texas bonus?

MLBPA, however, has indicated that it views revenuesharing as a de facto salary cap and
considers it a dead issue.

Under the proposed guidelines, Globe Life Field, the Rangers $1.2 billion stadium that was
set to open this year, could play host to about 20,000 fans. The stadium’s full capacity is
listed as 40,300.

The Rangers have been hosting high school graduations for the last week as the first
events open to attendees. Graduates and up to four family members have been allowed into
the park with social distancing rules in place.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200605/page/1/textview 2/2
