2020. 6. 17. Dan Patrick

Dan Patrick
Lieutenant governor calls for a religious revival, not more laws

The Dallas Morning News - 5 Jun 2020 - 1A: By ROBERT T. GARRETT Austin Bureau rigarrett@dallasnews.com Twitter:
@Roberttgarrett

calls for religious revival to root out racism.

  

AUSTIN — Lt. Gov. Dan Patrick has reacted to George Floyd’s death with a call for a reli-
gious revival in America — of the Christian variety.

Speaking to a Fox News interviewer late Wednesday, Patrick signaled deep skepticism that
police brutality and racial discrimination could be alleviated by passing more laws.

“We have racism in this country, Shannon, but it’s really an issue of love,” he told Fox
News @ Night’s Shannon Bream. “You cannot love your fellow man if you don’t love God,
and we have a country where we’ve been working really hard, particularly on the left, to
kick God out.”

Eliminating racism will take “a culture change,” said Patrick, a staunchly conservative
Republican and unabashed bornagain Christian who’s in his second term in the state’s No.
2 job.

“You cannot change the culture of a country until you change the character of mankind,
and you can’t change that unless you change your heart,” he said.

“And for billions of us on the planet, we believe you can’t do that unless you accept Jesus
Christ, or unless you accept God, and God has been left out of this equation through all of
this. And we need tremendous healing.”

Patrick said such healing won’t come “through commissions and blue ribbon panels and
more laws. We can only heal ourselves if we really reach out and love one another.”

Floyd, a Houston native, was killed on Memorial Day as a Minneapolis police officer knelt
on his neck for more than eight minutes as he lay handcuffed on the street, gasping and
pleading that he couldn’t breathe.

The officer has been charged with seconddegree murder, and three other officers who were
at the scene face charges of aiding and abetting seconddegree murder.

Though thousands of Texans have marched in protest in both major and midsize cities and
suburbs in recent days, Patrick said he was generally pleased with events in the state.
“Weve had a few problems in a few of our towns, but basically our protests have been
peaceful in Texas,” he said. “We’re united against that heinous crime against George
Floyd. We’re united in supporting First Amendment rights to peaceful protests.

Patrick frequently praises police and has spearheaded passage of legislation to provide
state grants so officers can be provided body armor.

In 2016, he drew criticism for remarks he made after five Dallas police officers were killed
— by an African American military veteran — during protests in downtown Dallas against

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200605/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Dan Patrick

highprofile police shootings of African Americans in Louisiana and Minnesota.

Patrick blamed Black Lives Matter protesters for the violence against police and said peo-
ple “with big mouths are creating situations like we saw last night.”

“We have to have their back,” Patrick said of police officers. “And I’m sick and tired of
those who are protesting our police and putting their lives in danger.”

Two months later, he said at the Texas Tribune Festival in Austin that the slain Dallas offi-
cers would still be alive if the Black Lives Matter movement hadn’t existed.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200605/page/1/textview 2/2
