2020. 6. 17. ‘Deepening pain and anguish of black communities’

‘Deepening pain and anguish of black communities’
Policymakers want to ban lesslethal ammunition

The Dallas Morning News - 11 Jun 2020: 1A - By NIC GARCIA Staff Writer nic.garcia@dallasnews.com

A growing number of people suffering serious injuries in Dallas, Austin and across the na-
tion from plastic, rubber and wooden bullets are raising new questions about how and

when police officers use these weapons.

 

The conversation is happening against a backdrop of civil unrest and demonstrations re-
sulting from sustained police brutality against black people.

Dallas police — and other local law enforcement agencies that were also on patrol down-
town — are investigating two incidents that happened during the first weekend of
protests.

Meanwhile, Austin’s police chief on June 4 banned the use of these weapons for crowdcon-
trol purposes after a 20yearold black man, a Latino teenager and a pregnant woman were
critically injured.

And now, Dallas and state policymakers are calling for the prohibition of these weapons.
Dallas Council member Adam Bazaldua, who represents East and South Dallas, on Monday
called on the police chief to prohibit any use of force in protests — including lesslethal
ammunition — “except in most extreme circumstances.”

“When I say that I don’t want these used, it’s because we’ve seen that they’ve been used
inappropriately,”

Bazaldua said.

The topic is also expected to be part of the next legislative session in Austin.

“We have people in critical condition at the hospital,” said state Rep. Erin Zwiener, a Drift-
wood Democrat. ''Even if these aren’t as lifeending as often, they’re certainly lifealtering.
https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 1/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. ‘Deepening pain and anguish of black communities’

And I’m not seeing these weapons used with the judiciousness and respect for life that a
weapon of the kind requires.”

Texas state law does not specifically regulate lesslethal ammunition. However, according
to state policy experts, the use of these weapons is gen

erally governed by several statutes that spell out rules around use of force. What’s more,
bigcity police departments typically have policies that dictate training, use and reporting
requirements around weapons and contact with civilians, experts said.

Dallas police general orders, a manual that outlines how officers are supposed to conduct
themselves, detail how officers should use the “Stinger” Less Lethal Launching system.
The stinger is a gun that fires plastic ammunition with a top made of a dense foam mate-
rial. Weapons experts said not to confuse the foam used for these types of bullets with a
kitchen sponge or Nerf toy gun.

Guidelines for use

Among the guidelines: Officers are required to have eight hours of training per year and to
immediately report when they use them, and they are not to aim at a person’s head. After
the launcher is fired, officers are supposed to notify a supervisor.

Dallas police are investigating whether officers broke policy during incidents from the first
wave of protests on May 30. Brandon Saenz, 26, lost his left eye during an afternoon
protest near the city’s main library. And Vincent Doyle, 21, said he was shot by a projectile
later that night near Bank of America Plaza downtown.

Doyle’s injuries, which have not been previously reported, include deep cuts on his left
cheek and blurred vision. Doyle said he was in downtown Dallas to photograph the
protests. He was filming a cadre of police officers marching through downtown when he
said he saw a laser pointed his way. He yelled an expletive, then “don’t shoot!”

A boom followed.

“T’m still processing,” he said last week while recovering at the hospital. “I didn’t think
they were going to do anything.”

A police spokesman said in at least one case, the family notified the department of the
shooting. However, when The Dallas Morning News attempted to clarify further, he de-
clined additional comment since both cases are under investigation.

The News requested several interviews regarding these cases and the general use of less-
lethal weapons and provided questions to police in writing. Police did not respond.
However, Dallas Police Chief U. Reneé Hall said during a heated City Council meeting Fri-
day that the department’s investigation into one of the incidents so far suggested an offi-
cer from either Irving or Garland shot the weapon that injured one of the men — in part
because they believe the ammunition was made of wood, not plastic.

Spokesmen for both Irving and Garland police said all three departments are reviewing
body cam footage.

“The chief ’s desire is to have an answer by the end of the week," said Irving Officer Robert
Reeves.

Officers from Irving and Garland and state troopers were on hand early during the protests
to assist Dallas police.

Policy changes

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 1/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. ‘Deepening pain and anguish of black communities’

Dallas officials — including Hall — began outlining new policy shifts in response to the
protests last week. The chief announced late Thursday that she was updating the depart-
ment’s manual to require police officers “to either stop, or attempt to stop, another em-
ployee when force is being inappropriately applied or is no longer required.”

City Manager T.C. Broadnax on Friday outlined a series of new police reforms, but none of
them mentioned the weapons. However, city council members have discussed scaling back
what police may use for crowd control.

Several council members questioned Hall and Broadnax about the lesslethal weapons used
on the Margaret Hunt Hill Bridge during a June 1 peaceful demonstration. Mayor Eric John-
son also pressed Hall about whether officers used rubber bullets. Hall on Friday said she
didn’t know.

Deputy Mayor Pro Tem Adam Mcgough on Monday said he’s frustrated that the council
hasn’t gotten more information from Hall. He said it’s harder to act and implement poli-
cies when they don’t know exactly what happened.

“Everybody’s watching, and we’re going to be held accountable for what we didn’t know
and what we have done,” Mcgough told Hall.

‘No perfect tool’

Dallas Police Association President Mike Mata said city officers have been using these
weapons for several years. He said while officers are regularly trained, it’s difficult to an-
ticipate every scenario. It’s also nearly impossible to predict how a person in the line of
sight will react after an officer has pulled the trigger, he said.

“There is no perfect tool,” he said.

The British military developed rubber bullets, the first form of lesslethal ammunition, 50
years ago to help control nationalist rioters in Northern Ireland, said Alex del Carmen, a
criminology professor at Tarleton State University in Fort Worth.

Del Carmen said while these weapons have been popular overseas, including in places such
as Israel, widespread use is a recent phenomenon in the U.S.

While no national or state policy exists to explicitly regulate their use, del Carmen said,
that “force should always commensurate with the threat.”

“The idea is not to kill someone but to remind them of pain,” he said, adding that it’s al-
most always likely that when this type of ammunition is used, injuries will occur. “The
norm is that any time you put a human element with a rubber gun in a transient situation,
you’ re going to have those incidents that I’m gravely concerned about.”

Researchers at Berkeley found that between 1990 and 2017, at least 1,984 people worldwide
were injured by these types of weapons. Fiftythree died and 300 people suffered permanent
disability, according to the 2017 study.

The researchers found there are more than 75 different types of lesslethal bullets and
launchers made in countries including Brazil, China and the

U.S. They are called bird shots, rubber balls, foam bullets and kinetic impact projectiles.
Made of rubber, plastic and metal — each causes its own degree of torment.

Another factor that determines the severity of injury appears to be the distance between
the person firing the weapon and the person hit. The shorter the distance, the more lethal
they become. The further the distance, the less accurate they become.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 1/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. ‘Deepening pain and anguish of black communities’

“We have serious doubts that those weapons can be used in any manner that are safe and
effective,” said Nick Hudson, a policy analyst for the Texas ACLU. His organization sent a
letter to city, county and police officials discouraging the use of these weapons as a way to
control crowds.

“Police brutality and racism is the reason we’re here, and the use of these weapons against
the protesters is only deepening the pain and anguish of black communities.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 1/page/1/textview 4/4
