2020. 6. 17. Small steps for D.C., Va. suburbs

Small steps for D.C., Va. suburbs

FIRST REOPENINGS ARE SET FOR FRIDAY Md. border areas will keep re-
strictions in place

The Washington Post : 28 May 2020 - A1 - BY FENIT NIRAPPIL, EMILY DAVIES AND OVETTA WIGGINS

The District will join Northern Virginia suburbs Friday in taking tentative steps toward
ending their prolonged economic shutdown, the start of a gradual reopening of the coron-
avirus-battered Washington region.

 

Maryland Gov. Larry Hogan (R) also will ease statewide restrictions to allow for outdoor
dining and youth day camps this summer, but the leaders of populous Maryland suburbs
that border the District have not yet said whether they will join in.

For the first time in nearly two months, Washingtonians will be able to dine at a restaurant
(outside seating only), get a haircut and shop curbside from stores deemed nonessential.
Indoor worship services will be capped at 10 people, and gyms, pools and day camps will
still be shuttered.

Most people who have been working from home should continue to do so, local leaders
said.

D.C. Mayor Muriel E. Bowser (D) said she decided to lift the capital’s stay-at-home order
Friday because covid-19 hospitalizations have stabilized in the city and the spread of the
virus is declining, even as the rate of positive tests in the region remains higher than that
of many states.

“In my mind, I call it stay-athome light,” Bowser said of the

relaxed restrictions. “It means the stay-at-home order has been lifted, and some activities
have been added back to what we can do, but they are minimal.”

Public health experts caution that the danger has yet to pass from the highly contagious
novel coronavirus, which has infected more than 97,000 people and killed more than 4,100
in the District, Maryland and Virginia. A rush to pre-pandemic life could fuel another wave
of infections, they warn, and trigger another round of restrictive measures.

The first phase of recovery in the District will include the reopening of parks, fields and
tennis courts, barbershops by appointment, nonessential retailers for delivery and curb-
side service. Residents will still be required to maintain six feet of distance from others and

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200528/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. Small steps for D.C., Va. suburbs

to wear masks while inside most businesses. Playgrounds and nail salons are among enti-
ties still closed, and gatherings of 10 or more are still banned.

Virginia Gov. Ralph Northam (D), who launched a Phase 1 reopening in other parts of the
state May 15, is allowing Northern Virginia localities to start reopening Friday as well.

In Maryland, Hogan also began reopening May 15, but left it up to individual cities and
counties whether to opt in. On Wednesday, he said he would further relax restrictions as of
5 p.m. Friday, with outdoor pools, day camps and outdoor dining allowed to resume under
strict social distancing rules. Hogan cited declines in the rate of residents testing positive
for the coronavirus, and the state hitting its goal of 10,000 tests per day, among his rea-
sons for easing the shutdown.

“While we are moving to safely reopen the economy and put more people back to work, we
want to continue to strongly stress the need to follow CDC guidelines,” he said. “The fight
against this virus is by no means over.”

Leaders of Montgomery and Prince George’s counties — which have more residents, and
more infections and deaths, than any other part of the state — so far have held off from
easing the shutdown.

Montgomery County Executive Marc Elrich (D) and Prince George’s County Executive An-
gela D. Alsobrooks have scheduled news conferences for Thursday to announce their plans.
They have said they hope to open soon but won’t act before their counties are ready.

As of Wednesday, only two of Montgomery’s nine metrics had reached the desired 14 days
of consecutive declines, but Travis Gayles, the county health officer, said the rest are on
their way. The rate of patients testing positive for the coronavirus had decreased from a
high of over 30 percent in early May to below 15 percent, he said. New infections and hos-
pitalizations have also been declining.

One metric — the rate at which acute-care beds are being used — had declined only one
day out of the past 14, but Gayles said the county is adding hospital beds.

“T never said we were totally in lockstep,” Elrich said, speaking of regional leaders. “We're
focusing on doing what’s right. ... Be calm, it’ Il all work out in the end.”

Although officials have touted the importance of regional coordination in the pandemic
response, reopening decisions have largely been made independently, with each locality
emphasizing different benchmarks to lift restrictions and focusing on different areas to
reopen.

Maryland, for example, did not include outdoor dining when it first eased restrictions on
May 15, while Virginia did.

Maryland and Virginia also have softer restrictions on outdoor recreation than the District.
Summer camps will be virtual for the first phase of the District’s recovery, Bowser said last
week, but Maryland will permit day camps to operate with no more than 10 people gath-
ered in groups, and children wearing masks.

Maryland pools can operate at 25 percent capacity, with social distancing measures, while
Virginia pools are open only for lap swimming. Bowser said the District’s public pools are
unlikely to reopen this summer. Maryland will allow limited youth sports practices, with
social distancing restrictions. Virginia is not allowing organized sports, though Fairfax
County is allowing groups of 10 or fewer to play informal games on county athletic fields.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200528/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. Small steps for D.C., Va. suburbs

Bowser said she focused Phase 1 recovery plans on businesses that are most needed after
two months of a local shutdown, but where person-to-person contact can be minimized.
For example, barbers can reopen for appointments so long as their stations are spaced six
feet apart and customers wait outside for service. But nail care, waxing and eyebrow
threading are still prohibited.

In Fairfax, Prince William, Loudoun and Arlington counties, and Alexandria, places of
worship will be able to hold indoor services at 50 percent capacity, instead of the 10-per-
son limit in place in Northern Virginia. Restaurants and taverns can offer outdoor service
at half-capacity, and campgrounds and state parks will reopen.

On Wednesday, businesses in the Washington area were deciding whether to be among the
first to reopen.

Dave Nicholas, a managing partner at Alexandria Restaurant Partners, which oversees
eight restaurants, including Vola’s Dockside Grill in Old Town, said he plans to allow about
one-third capacity at each restaurant.

At Vola’s, just 40 of the 110 patio seats will be available. Employees will have their temper-
ature checked several times a day, while patrons will be required to cover their faces while
using the restrooms and will eventually have a QR code for menus.

“We're not in a rush, going to take things cautiously and slowly. Safety is going to be first.
We’re thinking, if we get to 30 percent of our normal volume in months to come, that will
be good,” Nicholas said.

Andy Shallal, founder of the chain Busboys and Poets, has rehired 40 percent of his staff
and held a training session in new procedures Wednesday to prepare for resuming dine-in
service.

D.C. restaurant owners can apply to extend seating into sidewalks or streets for limited pe-
riods of time. But Can Yurdagul, who owns Sushi Capitol, said he is wary of serving sushi
outdoors in hot weather, and will remain closed for now.

“It’s survival mode right now,” he said. “This is not the time to be financially motivated. It
is the time to be health motivated.”

Sheila Weaver, a barber at Wrenn’s in the Navy Yard, spent Wednesday morning texting
her regulars, trying to gauge their level of interest in getting a haircut under the new rules.
“I have to see what my customers want because they are the ones who are paying me,” she
said. “But I am definitely concerned. I don’t want to be thirsty and pull down my mask to
drink water and kill everybody in the shop.”

Angela Sitilides, the owner of the boutique cosmetic store Bellacara in Alexandria, has of-
fered only curbside pickup for the last two months, but will welcome up to five customers
inside at a time starting Friday.

She and her three employees spray all of her products with alcohol each hour, and she has
placed samples in single-size packaging and installed a sink to ensure patrons can wash
their hands if they wish.

“It’s going to be about trust,” Sitilides said. “It’s going to be about knowing that we’ve
done everything we need to do to make sure that their shopping environment feels safe.”
Religious leaders, meanwhile, are weighing whether to resume in-person worship.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200528/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. Small steps for D.C., Va. suburbs

Northern Virginia’s Catholic churches can resume in-person services starting this week-
end, the Catholic Diocese of Arlington said, but each parish can make its own decision and
must require churchgoers to wear masks.

In the District, full worship services will be impractical for most churches, with crowd size
so limited. At Third Street Church of God, the Rev. Cheryl Sanders said the 10-person limit
leaves her only with enough people to host a livestreamed worship service: “a preacher,
deacon, worship leader, musician, liturgical dancer, audio technician, video technician,
teller and trustee.”

Leaders in some denominations, including United Methodist churches in the District and
its Maryland suburbs and the Episcopal church in the District, said they are not set to re-
open, regardless of the government’s rules.

There are now 97,078 coronavirus cases and 4,118 deaths in Maryland, the District and
Virginia, after the three jurisdictions reported more than 1,700 new cases and 109 fatalities
Wednesday.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200528/page/1/textview 4/4
