2020. 6. 18. PROVING HER METAL

PROVING HER METAL

An Oklahoma jewelry maker's copper cuffs are helping bring hope to other
local artists

The Oklahoman - 4 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Emma Davis Staff writer edavis@oklahoman.com

ATulsa jewelry artist has supported local artists and musicians through jewelry sales as
changes made due to COVID-19 have put many out of work.

 

Jewelry artist Rachel Dazey, designer at the jewelry store Dillon/Rose, began selling copper
cuffs at the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic to benefit Oklahoman creatives, includ-
ing graphic and tattoo artists, Dazey said.

Dazey said she chose to make her cuffs from copper because of its antiviral and antibacte-
rial capabilities. Dazey sees the metal as a symbol of hope.

“T ... just wanted to encourage my community of creatives in Oklahoma, where (they're)
obviously going through all their shows being canceled, not being able to perform, (and)
having to really figure out how to

show the public their work,” Dazey said. “So I came up with this idea to use copper as the
symbol to just encourage them and bring hope to our community.”

After reaching her goal of $2,500 on March 25 that went directly to local creatives, Dazey
began partnering with Tulsa's Red Dirt Relief Fund to give a portion of her profits to Okla-
homa musicians, Dazy said.

The Red Dirt Relief Fund, whose mission is to provide a safety net for Oklahomans in the
music industry, launched a COVID-19 emergency grant program that has provided assis-
tance to 472 applicants and $118,000 in grants since March 16, said Katie Dale, Red Dirt
Relief Fund executive director. Each grant of $250 is given to someone in the music indus-
https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/20200604/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. PROVING HER METAL

try who has been hit with $1,000 or more in financial loss due to cancellations or post-
ponements.

Dazey's contribution

to the Red Dirt Relief Fund has helped fund nine grants in this program, Dale said.

“It's just really inspiring to have the support of other artists, especially given her particu-
lar work, to see the need for fellow people working in the arts in Oklahoma,” Dale said.
“And the support she's gaining

through her customers and the clientele can be shared with those who are having a harder
time making a living during this time.”

Dazey plans to continue her sales through the website until music venues are reopened.
“Musicians have been, I think, one of the hardest hit as creatives, and we have such a vi-
brant music community here that I really want to see that continue after this,” she said.
“So it's important to me to continue supporting them.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/20200604/page/1/textview 2/2
