2020. 6. 17. The Texas Supreme Court

The Texas Supreme Court
State high court: Lack of COVID19 immunity isn’t physical disability

The Dallas Morning News - 28 May 2020 - 1A - By JAMES BARRAGAN Austin Bureau jbarragan@dallasnews.com

ruled that lack of immunity to COVID19 alone is not a physical disability that qualifies peo-
ple to vote by mail.

AUSTIN — The Texas Supreme Court on Wednesday ruled that lack of immunity to
COVID19 alone is not a physical disability that qualifies people to vote by mail.

The ruling is a victory for Attorney General Ken Paxton, who has argued that only a physi-
cal illness or disability that prevents voters from going to the polls should qualify people to
vote by mail. It is a loss for the Texas Democratic

Party and voting rights groups who had pushed for expanded mail voting during the coro-
navirus pandemic and had won temporary victories in lower courts.

The question of expanded mail voting is also being fought in federal courts, where an ap
peals court is considering whether to stay an order by a district judge that allowed those
who lack immunity to COVID19 to vote by mail.

The two cases are playing out at the same time and the legal battle is expected to continue
as both sides argue about how to safely conduct the primary runoffs scheduled for July 14.
Early voting in those elections begins June 29.

In the majority opinion from the Texas Supreme Court, Chief Justice Nathan Hecht, joined
by six other justices, acknowledged the intense political debate surrounding voting by
mail.

“The question before us is not whether voting by mail is better policy or worse, but what
the Legislature has enacted. It is purely a question of law,” he wrote. “Our authority and
responsibility are to interpret the statutory text and give effect to the Legislature’s intent.
We agree with the State that a voter’s lack of immunity to COVID19, without more, is not a
‘disability’ as defined by the Election Code.”

Defining a disability

Under the state election code, a disability is a sickness or physical condition preventing in
person voting without a likelihood of harm to the voter’s health. But the court, which
heard arguments in the case through a videoconference instead of in person as a precau-
tion against spreading the disease, said a lack of immunity to COVID19 did not meet that
threshold against a number of tests.

If a “physical condition” means a “physical state of being,” Hecht wrote, “it would swal-
low the other categories of voters eligible for mailin voting.”

“A voter’s location during an election period is certainly a physical state of being. So are
age, incarceration, sickness, and childbirth, even participation in a program,” he wrote.
“To give ‘physical condition’ so broad a meaning would render the other mailin voting
categories surplusage.”

He said if that definition was adopted, “being too tired to drive to a polling place would be
a physical condition” and it could not be reconciled with the Legislature’s history of nar-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200528/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. The Texas Supreme Court

rowly limiting mailin voting.

Hecht also wrote that a lack of immunity to COVID19 could not be understood as an abnor-
mal or distinguishing condition or as a condition that “incapacitated by or as if by illness,
injury, or wounds.”

“Accordingly, we conclude that a lack of immunity to COVID19 is not itself a ‘physical con-
dition’ for being eligible to vote by mail within the meaning” of the statute, he wrote.

The Supreme Court, however, did not grant a request from Paxton to order county elec-
tions administrators to reject mail ballot applications from voters who fear contracting the
coronavirus.

Voters applying for mail ballots can check disability as their reason for seeking to vote by
mail. But county elections administrators do not have the authority to investigate or ques-
tion that answer further. State law essentially places in a voter’s hand the determination of
whether inperson voting will cause a likelihood of injury due to a physical condition.
“While the State has alleged that the Clerks are accepting “improper application[s],” there
is no evidence in the record that any has accepted a faulty application,” Hecht wrote.
Hecht wrote that the clerks had assured the court they would follow the law and the
Supreme Court’s new guidance. Because of that, Paxton’s request was unwarranted.

Still, Paxton celebrated the court’s decision.

“T applaud the Texas Supreme Court for ruling that certain election officials’ definition of
‘disability’ does not trump that of the Legislature, which has determined that widespread
mailin balloting carries unacceptable risks of corruption and fraud,” Paxton said ina
statement. “Election officials have a duty to reject mailin ballot applications from voters
who are not entitled to vote by mail. Inperson voting is the surest way to maintain the in-
tegrity of our elections, prevent voter fraud and guarantee that every voter is who they
claim to be.”

Democratic reaction

The Texas Democratic Party panned the court’s decision, calling it partisan. All nine jus-
tices are Republicans and are elected to the court by Texas voters.

“Leave it to the allrepublican Texas Supreme Court to put out 45 pages of opinion and give
no guidance to voters about who can vote by mail during a pandemic — even after one of
the Supreme Court justices under the age of 65 contracted coronavirus last week,” Gilberto
Hinojosa, the party’s chairman said in a statement. “This is reflective of Texas Republican
leadership that long ago failed to serve Texans’ needs and interests.”

Last week, Justice Debra Lehrmann announced that she and her husband had tested posi-
tive for COVID19. On Wednesday, Lehrmann joined the majority opinion.

In his statement, Hinojosa said Hecht and three other sitting justices are up for reelection
in November. Lehrmann’s term is not up until 2022. In recent weeks, the Democratic Party
has stepped up its efforts to publicize its candidates for the court.

“Make no mistake, if the federal courts don’t step in, here is the list of people making you
stand in line during the middle of this pandemic,” Hinojosa said in his statement, which
listed the court’s nine justices.

“Now, unless the federal court steps in, because of the Texas Republican Supreme Court,
voters will have to either risk standing in line and contracting the coronavirus or they’ ll

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200528/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. The Texas Supreme Court

risk prosecution by indicted Texas Republican Attorney General Ken Paxton and his grand
juries for simply requesting a mailinballot,” he added.

Reacting to the news on KTBCTV in Austin, Gov. Greg Abbott said his office had prepared
for safe voting procedures if the court sided with the state. On Tuesday, Secretary of State
Ruth R. Hughs, an Abbott appointee, issued guidance to local officials on how to run inper-
son elections during the pandemic.

“TI made sure that early voting was going to be extended so that people would have extra
time to vote early in ways in which they would reduce their content contact with others,
reduce the possibility of contracting or spread of COVID19 during the voting process,” he
said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200528/page/1/textview 3/3
