2020. 6. 17. WHO: Agency warns of second peak and opposes swift reopenings.

WHO: Agency warns of second peak and opposes swift re-
openings.

Crowded holiday events fuel worries about effect of unchecked behavior

The Washington Post - 27 May 2020 - A1 - BY BRADY DENNIS, MEAGAN FLYNN AND RICK NOACK brady.den-
nis@washpost.com meagan.flynyn@washpost.com rick.noack@washpost.com Derek Hawkins, Siobhan O’grady, Jennifer Has-
san, Lateshia Beachum, Joel Achenbach, Taylor Telford, Thomas Heath and Marissa lati contr

The World Health Organization on Tuesday warned nations against scaling back coron-
avirus restrictions too quickly, saying a premature push to return to normalcy could fuel a
rapid acceleration of new cases.

  

“We cannot make assumptions that just because the disease is on the way down now that
it’s going to keep going down,” Mike Ryan, head of the WHO’S health emergencies pro-
gram, told reporters during a briefing.

He cautioned that countries could face another peak of coronavirus cases even ahead of a
presumed second wave of infections months from now. “The disease can jump up at any
time,” he added.

That warning echoed concerns from public health experts and others who have urged lo-
cal, state and federal leaders to move slowly as they seek to reopen their economies. But
the pleas for caution collided with a shifting reality as spring gives way to summer.

In the United States, where the death toll on Tuesday approached 100,000, crowds flooded
newly reopened beaches and other public spaces over Memorial Day weekend, even as the
virus claimed more than 2,000 additional lives.

At aclub in Houston, dozens splashed around the pool and sipped on drinks on the patio.
In North Carolina, thousands packed the stands shoulder to shoulder at a speedway on
opening night, where face masks were the exception. In Daytona Beach, Fla., even after an

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200527/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. WHO: Agency warns of second peak and opposes swift reopenings.

event called “Orlando Invades Daytona” was canceled, hundreds of people still danced in
the street and on top of cars near the boardwalk.

In Missouri, vacationers flocked to the Lake of the Ozarks, packing pools and outdoor bars
as they flouted social distancing guidelines. In Maryland, visitors crammed the boardwalk
at Ocean City.

The piecemeal return to normal life in the United States, where the number of confirmed
coronavirus infections at nearly 1.7 million is more than quadruple any other nation, has
unfolded unevenly and uneasily as different states have taken different approaches.

The raucous events across the country over the holiday weekend led some local officials to
express alarm that the consequences could be dire if such behavior continues unchecked.
Houston Mayor Sylvester Turner (D), for instance, pledged to crack down on businesses
failing to enforce capacity restrictions. Turner chastised clubgoers whose behavior risks
exposing residents “who chose to do the right thing” by staying home.

After images of the partyers at the Lake of the Ozarks went viral over the weekend — in-
cluding a pool party at Backwater Jack’s that featured the theme “Zero Ducks Given” — St.
Louis County officials issued a travel advisory, calling the scenes an “international exam-
ple of bad judgment.”

The weekend’s crowded festivities in parts of the country could foreshadow the challenges
local officials increasingly will face this summer as governors gradually roll back restric-
tions and residents flood reopened businesses.

In areas that no longer have enforceable executive orders, authorities insist there is little
they can do to require people to practice social distancing. The mayor of Osage Beach, Mo.,
where the packed pool parties took place, said he views it as essential that his town’s
tourist-dependent businesses reopen, while police there said they couldn’t enforce re-
strictions.

“It kind of ties our hands when they’re just guidelines and not mandates,” Chris Twitchel,
captain of operations for the Camden County Sheriff ’s Office, told The Washington Post.
Elsewhere, even where executive orders remain in place, some local authorities have re-
fused to enforce them, and many residents have chosen to ignore them. Such was the case
in Alamance County, N.C., where an estimated 4,000 spectators filled the stands for races
at Ace Speedway.

Although Democratic Gov. Roy Cooper’s second phase of reopening North Carolina limits
outdoor gatherings to 25 people, Alamance County Sheriff Terry Johnson said he would
refuse to “enforce an unconstitutional law,” allowing the speedway’s opening night to
proceed on Saturday, WIVD reported.

“We're tired of being stuck in the house,” one spectator told a local news station. “I’m not
afraid of this virus one bit.”

Several factors have contributed to ongoing clashes about how long restrictions should re-
main in place. Some parts of the country continue to wrestle with crippling caseloads,
while others have barely been affected by the pandemic. Whether to wear masks has be-
come a political issue, rather than merely a public health one. And on top of those divides,
much about the virus remains uncertain and mysterious.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200527/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. WHO: Agency warns of second peak and opposes swift reopenings.

“What’s crazy is, we’re three months in, and we’re still not able to calibrate our risk man-
agement. It’s a mess,” said University of Virginia professor Brian Nosek, who runs the
Center for Open Science, which advocates for transparency in research.

Basic questions about the virus that causes the disease covid-19 remain unanswered: How
deadly is it? Exactly how contagious? Are there different strains with different clinical out-
comes? Why does the virus create a devastating disease in some people while leaving oth-
ers with few, if any, symptoms?

With stay-at-home orders around the country expiring and businesses reopening, all the
scientific data is being scrutinized anew. But the numbers are often ambiguous, with large
margins of error. Because this is still an early phase of the pandemic, scientific findings
have to be couched in tentative, provisional, sometimes squishy language festooned with
caveats and admitted limitations.

Despite that lingering uncertainty and the crowds in recent days that have caused angst
among public health experts, there were flickers of economic optimism as the week began.
Investors celebrated the reopening of the New York Stock Exchange by sending stocks
soaring Tuesday. The Dow Jones industrial average closed the day up 530 points, about 2.2
percent, while the Standard & Poor’s 500 index jumped 36 points, about 1.2 percent, to fin-
ish at 2,991.77.

“With more signs of the worst of the virus being behind us, investors are beginning to fo-
cus on more countries reopening and the lifting of travel bans around the world,” Torsten
Slok, chief economist for Deutsche Bank Securities, said in an email. “More signs of re-
opening and more signs of travel bans being lifted creates more clarity for markets.”

In Europe, officials faced mounting calls to reopen European Union borders ahead of the
summer holiday season, although key details remain unresolved.

Spanish officials will no longer require international tourists to self-quarantine starting
July 1, following similar decisions by Italy and Greece.

British Prime Minister Boris Johnson announced that as of June 1, outdoor markets will
open, along with car showrooms. Beginning June 15, department stores and independent
shops will be allowed to reopen as long as measures to protect staff and customers are in
place.

Meanwhile, Palestinian officials on Tuesday reopened one of Christianity’s most sacred
sites, Bethlehem’s Church of the Nativity, after it closed to visitors almost two months
ago.

More than 1.5 million people passed through U.S. airports during Memorial Day weekend,
marking a significant increase from recent weeks — even though that figure represents
less than 13 percent of air travel during the same period last year. The number of travelers
Thursday and Monday also topped 300,000. It has been more than two months since fed-
eral workers last screened that volume of travelers.

New-home sales also grew unexpectedly in April, eking out a slight gain instead of the
steep decline that had been forecast, the Commerce Department reported Tuesday. Sales of
new single-family homes rose 0.6 percent in April — a modest but significant advance
given the nearly 40 million job losses the nation has endured since the coronavirus took
hold about 10 weeks ago.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200527/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. WHO: Agency warns of second peak and opposes swift reopenings.

Between tweets on Tuesday railing against mail-in ballots and raising a conspiracy theory
involving MSNBC host Joe Scarborough, President Trump took time to laud his adminis-
tration’s response to the pandemic and trumpet the stock market gains.

“States should open up ASAP,” he tweeted. “The Transition to Greatness has started,
ahead of schedule.”

In reality, it’s a transition that remains fragile.

“We now see a trend in an uptick in hospitalizations. It’s a small uptick, but it is an uptick,
and it is unmistakable, and it is probably a result of reopening,” former Food and Drug Ad-
ministration commissioner Scott Gottlieb said Tuesday morning in an interview on CNBC.
‘“We expected cases to go up and hospitalizations to bump up when we reopened.”

States such as Florida, Georgia and Virginia have registered increased hospitalization
numbers, he said. “We’re going to have to watch it,” Gottlieb said. “The hope is that
there’s a seasonal effect. ... That seasonal effect will hopefully offset the increased social
interaction, which is going to cause cases to go up.”

Social interaction should be approached with some level of caution, he added, referring to
the crowds of people celebrating in the Ozarks over the weekend.

“T’m concerned that there are people who think that this is the all-clear,” he said. “I think
what we really need to be doing is defining a new normal. We’ re going to need to live dif-
ferently until we get to a vaccine.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200527/page/1/textview 4/4
