2020. 6. 16. D.C. region: Crowds at beaches and boardwalks renew concerns.

D.C. region: Crowds at beaches and boardwalks renew con-
cerns.

TOTAL INFECTIONS IN REGION TOP 90,000

The Washington Post - 25 May 2020 - A1 - BY JOE HEIM, REBECCA TAN, LAURA VOZZELLA AND JULIE ZAUZMER

One-day D.C. spike comes as city eyes plans to reopen

 

ee

As the total number of coronavirus infections in the Washington region topped 90,000
Sunday and fatalities hit 3,880, a one-day spike in the District’s numbers raised questions
about whether it can begin reopening as expected on Friday. And social media images of a
crowded Ocean City boardwalk and an unmasked Virginia governor mingling with beach-
goers had many wondering whether safety guidelines meant to contain the disease were
being taken seriously enough.

Laquandra Nesbitt, director of the D.C. health department, said in a call with reporters
Sunday that data collected over the weekend shows that the number of cases linked to
community spread — calculated by the date of symptom onset and excluding cases at con-
fined facilities such as nursing homes — increased from a low of 68 on day 12 to 118 on day
13. This jump broke a 12-day streak of declines and meant the city had to “reset” to day 11,
Nesbitt said.

She declined to say whether that means the city is reconsidering lifting restrictions on Fri-
day, deferring questions to Mayor Muriel E. Bowser (D), who is expected to announce her
decision Tuesday.

The District on Sunday recorded five deaths and 144 new infections, just above the seven-
day average of 141.

“We'll have to let the graph speak for itself,” Nesbitt said.

The city had eyed May 29 as the date to gradually begin reopening following the mayor’s
lengthy stay-at-home order. The stay-athome and business closure orders were scheduled
to run through June 8.

As Virginia’s gradual reopening continued, Gov. Ralph Northam (D) was slammed on social
media over the weekend after he appeared without a mask and up close with visitors in
Virginia Beach.

Northam has encouraged Virginians to wear masks in public

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200525/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 16. D.C. region: Crowds at beaches and boardwalks renew concerns.

and indicated on Friday that he planned to issue a mask mandate this week, although it is
not clear if that would apply to outdoor public spaces, such as parks or beaches.

Northam, a physician, has also urged social distancing, specifically staying at least six feet
apart from others in public.

In photos that appeared on Twitter and Facebook, Northam stands elbow-to-elbow with a
group of three people as they pose for a picture at the shore. In another, he takes a selfie
with one woman. In another, he appears to be on the crowded beach boardwalk.
“Physician, heal thyself,” House Minority Leader Todd Gilbert (RShenandoah) tweeted.
Northam’s office initially noted the governor was outside and was not expecting to get
close to anyone, but people recognized him and wanted to take pictures.

A spokeswoman later sent an updated statement acknowledging that the governor could
have been better prepared for the crowd and had a mask.

“This is an important reminder to always have face coverings in case situations change —
we are all learning how to operate in this new normal, and it’s important to be prepared,”
said spokeswoman Alena Yarmosky.

Northam, who allowed rules on beaches to ease Friday in time for the Memorial Day holi-
day, had traveled to the beach “to make sure beach rules were being enforced,” Yarmosky
said.

“While he was only there a short amount of time, most people he saw were observing the
rules,” Yarmosky said. “He expects a more complete assessment of the situation at the
conclusion of the weekend, and will continue to be in touch with city officials as they en-
force their guidelines.”

Virginia began reopening May 15 with restaurants licensed for outdoor seating allowed to
resume operations with limited capacity. Barber shops and beauty salons were also allowed
to reopen with some restrictions. The reopening did not include Northern Virginia counties
in the Washington suburbs, Richmond and Accomack County on the Eastern Shore, which
has had an outbreak related to poultry processing plants.

The state added 12 new deaths Sunday, about half of its seven-day rolling average, and 495
new infections — the lowest number in more than a month. The number of patients hospi-
talized also dropped to 1,351, which is the lowest since April 21.

Virginia Beach Vice Mayor James Wood, who was with Northam when the photos were
taken, said the governor was “mobbed by people who were happy to see him.”

“T don’t know what you can do when people run up to you,” Wood said. “I mean, you can’t
push them away.”

Wood also said the photos being circulated online misrepresent the situation on the
ground. He said he was at the boardwalk from 10:30 a.m. to 2 p.m. Saturday, and he “did
not see a big crowd at all.”

“T’m not at all concerned,” he added. “I saw people social distancing, I saw people follow-
ing the rules. ... There was nothing inappropriate.”

The city monitors the beach with drones and surveillance cameras, Wood said, and when
crowds have been identified, either police or the city’s 100 “beach ambassadors” have
been able to ask visitors to voluntarily disperse.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200525/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 16. D.C. region: Crowds at beaches and boardwalks renew concerns.

Virginia Beach does not require residents to wear masks in outdoor locations, Wood noted,
and most beachgoers Saturday, including himself, were not wearing them.

Wood said it is “always a concern” that Virginia Beach could experience a resurgence in
infections, but that the city is ready to welcome visitors who agree to observe social dis-
tancing rules. “[Constituents] frankly want more restrictions lifted,” he said. “People
want to see everything open.”

In Ocean City, large crowds of visitors, many of whom were not wearing masks, descended
on the boardwalk Saturday. Images and video of the boardwalk crowd sparked a social me-
dia frenzy, with many commenters comparing the scene to a huge gathering of young peo-
ple in Missouri’s Lake of the Ozarks, who also appeared to not be following social distanc-
ing guidelines.

Ocean City Mayor Rick Meehan said he did not want to diminish safety concerns but said
that some of the images shared Saturday did not accurately depict conditions on the
boardwalk and that it looked more crowded than it was.

“It’s obviously challenging, because we have a lot of people who want to be out together,
but when you’re on the boardwalk, you will see that people are not really up on each
other,” he said Sunday. “People are trying to keep their distance, they’re not walking into
each other, and they’re being courteous.”

Meehan said the city continues to monitor the crowds and insist that visitors follow social
distancing guidelines. He said that “it would be nice” if more people on the boardwalk
would wear masks but that visitors are wearing masks when they go inside stores and
buildings.

“Tt’s all about compliance and getting people to take responsibility and be courteous. And
so far, that’s what we’re seeing,” he said.

Live-stream Ocean City boardwalk webcams Sunday showed fewer visitors to the popular
tourist destination, perhaps due in part to inclement weather.

Maryland added 34 new deaths and 818 new cases Sunday. The seven-day average in new
fatalities has been on a gradual decline for nearly two weeks, though the corresponding
figure for new infections has been increasing. After a spike in cases on May 19, the state
began posting a rolling seven-day average of more than 1,000 new infections — the high-
est numbers since the start of the outbreak. More than half of the new cases Sunday were
in the D.C. suburbs, with Montgomery and Prince George’s counties adding 223 and 197
new cases, respectively. The number of covid-19 patients hospitalized in Maryland — a
key metric for reopening on both the state and local levels — dropped for the ninth con-
secutive day to 1,290, the lowest since midApril.

Maryland also began Phase 1 of its reopening on May 15, but several of its most populous
counties, including Montgomery and Prince George’s, remain shut down because their
leaders said there were still too many cases of the virus to reduce restrictions. In much of
the rest of the state, however, retail stores have reopened with safety guidelines in place.
State parks, beaches and golf courses have also reopened. Churches can hold services if
they don’t exceed a 10-person capacity.

Sunday saw at least one church in the region hold full indoor services in defiance of local
rules after President Trump’s comment Friday that he would “override the governors” in

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200525/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 16. D.C. region: Crowds at beaches and boardwalks renew concerns.

any state that did not deem churches “essential” and allow them to host in-person ser-
vices during Memorial Day weekend. But the president took no legal action to compel
states to allow churches to open, nor was it clear that he could do so.

A church in Anne Arundel County defied a ban on indoor worship services with more than
10 attendees. Chesapeake Christian Fellowship, a nondenominational church in David-
sonville, hosted three 45-minute services and said it would allow up to 120 attendees at
each service.

The church announced rules:

No children under 11 were allowed; worshipers had to sit six feet apart and were required to
wear masks; and every person’s temperature was checked at the door. No one could use
churchowned Bibles or drink from the water fountains, and only two people at a time could
use the restroom. Staff and volunteers were to let people in and then dismiss them again at
a distance from each other. Pews were to be cleaned between each service.

Still, all the protocols did not meet county rules. The Rev. James “Pat” Packett spoke in his
sermon at the 11 a.m. service of Trump’s “executive order” and made it clear he believed
that it carried the force of law. “Sadly, our county executive has refused to recognize those
orders of the president,” Packett said.

Trump issued no such executive order.

‘We who are Christians, I believe, have been unfairly discriminated against by govern-
mental mandates that have abrogated or tried to abrogate our First Amendment rights,”
Packett said, though the orders in Maryland and in all states apply equally to houses of
worship of any faith.

County Executive Steuart Pittman (D) said the health department had been trying to reach
the church’s leaders to discuss the risks.

‘We’ re not going to arrest people for going to church,” Pittman said, but he wanted to
make sure the pastor knew that the church risked lawsuits from its members or others if
new cases of the virus can be traced to the services.

“When they willfully neglect to follow the health rules and the consequences are illness
and death, they’re going to have some issues with people who decide to file lawsuits
against them,” he said.

He noted that Anne Arundel County has a team of more than 100 contact tracers who could
establish a link from these services to new coronavirus cases. “There’s a strong possibility,
whether it’s a church or any other institution that violates the order and spreads the virus,
it will be known,” he said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200525/page/1/textview 4/4
