2020. 6. 17. A statue of Confederate icon Jefferson Davis is loaded onto a tow truck Wednesday night after protesters pulled it from its pedesta...

A statue of Confederate icon Jefferson Davis is loaded onto a
tow truck Wednesday night after protesters pulled it from its
pedestal in Richmond.

The Washington Post : 12 Jun 2020 - Ai : BY GREGORY S. SCHNEIDER

The bronze figure had stood since 1907, about a half-mile up Monument Avenue from the
statue of Gen. Robert E. Lee that Virginia Gov. Ralph Northam (D) is fighting to remove.

  

richmond — Protesters impatient with legal efforts to remove Confederate statues took
matters into their own hands this week, toppling this city’s iconic figure of Jefferson Davis
and a statue in Portsmouth that caused a serious injury when it fell on a man’s head.

The bronze figure of the Confederate president had stood since 1907, about a half-mile up
Monument Avenue from the statue of Gen. Robert E. Lee that Gov. Ralph Northam is fight-
ing to remove.

A group of protesters pulled the Davis statue off its pedestal a little after 10:30 p.m. Wed-
nesday and dragged the paint-splattered figure across the road. Police surrounded the
fallen statue a short time later. A small crowd gathered, many of them holding signs from
demonstrations against police brutality toward African Americans that have swept Rich-
mond — like other cities around the country — for nearly two weeks.

In Portsmouth, a man was knocked unconscious when a falling statue of a Confederate
soldier hit him in the head, according to local and state police. The man was taken to a
hospital with what state police said was a life-threatening injury.

Northam (D) on Thursday ap

pealed to protesters to stop trying to tear down the “very large and very heavy” statues
themselves.

“We all came together to create a process to do that safely. We need to let that happen,” he
said in a press briefing. “Pulling them down is not worth risking someone’s life. Let’s do
this the right way and keep all Virginians safe.”

Republicans on Thursday charged that Northam was surrendering Virginia to “mob rule”
and called him “unfit to lead.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200612/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. A statue of Confederate icon Jefferson Davis is loaded onto a tow truck Wednesday night after protesters pulled it from its pedesta...

They also slammed Richmond Mayor Levar Stoney (D) for failing to prevent the destruc-
tion of the Davis statue just one night after protesters pulled down a statue of Christopher
Columbus — reviled for his treatment of indigenous peoples — and chucked it into a lake.
Earlier this week, protesters tore down a statue of another Confederate figure, Williams
Carter Wickham, in Monroe Park at Virginia Commonwealth University.

City police said they are investigating the incidents but didn’t directly answer questions
about whether they have softened enforcement after being criticized for gassing peaceful
demonstrators early last week. Richmond police spokesman Gene Lepley said the depart-
ment does not discuss patrol strategies but said police are “aware of the ongoing situation
and are constantly adjusting our methods to address it.”

Stoney, who is African American, tweeted Thursday that Davis was “a racist & traitor,” but
he urged protesters to stop taking matters into their own hands. “For the sake of public
safety, I ask the community to allow us to legally contract to have the remaining ones
removed professionally,” he tweeted.

Stoney and all members of the City Council have said they will support an ordinance to re-
move the four Confederate statues on city property along Monument Avenue, including
Davis. He cautioned Thursday that the statues are mere symbols of a bigger issue.
“Jefferson Davis is gone this morning, but it’s going to be a lot harder to dismantle the
racism he and his peers embodied and institutionalized. That’s what this city will keep
working toward,” Stoney tweeted.

In a text message obtained by The Washington Post and verified by the department’s
spokesman, Richmond Police Chief William C. Smith said the monuments have a “short
life span,” given the council’s plans to remove them. But he also said police, who were ini-
tially responding to reports that protesters were trying to pull down the Lee statue, at-
tempted to reach the Davis monument in time to stop the vandalism.

“By the time we had personnel respond to Davis, the statue had already been toppled,”
Smith texted to a Monument Avenue resident. “Our biggest concern is for life safety fol-
lowed by private property. The monuments have, based on city council, a short life span,
with Jeff davis monument already contracted for removal. We are most concerned about
large monuments that could injure someone.”

A Richmond work crew on Thursday removed the city’s police memorial statue from Byrd
Park, the same area where the Columbus statue had stood, about 21/ miles away from
Davis. A city

2 official said the memorial is being repaired and restored after damage inflicted during
recent demonstrations and will be returned to public display.

Northam had begun efforts this week to take down the Lee statue, which towers 60 feet
over a giant traffic circle and is the only one on state property. But a Circuit Court judge
granted a temporary injunction late Monday to halt the removal for 10 days as part of a suit
challenging Northam’s authority to take it down, filed by the descendant of a family who
deeded the land.

It was after that action that protesters began acting to take down statues on their own.
“Keep people waiting long enough, and something like this is bound to happen,” said a
24.-yearold man, who would only give his name as Thomas, who had bicycled over to see

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200612/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. A statue of Confederate icon Jefferson Davis is loaded onto a tow truck Wednesday night after protesters pulled it from its pedesta...

the fallen Davis statue late Wednesday.

One witness said a small group with tools and ropes had brought the statue down using a
car. When a flatbed tow truck arrived and workers and police began sizing up how to re-
move the figure from the street, a crowd of several dozen began a short chant of “nana na
na, hey hey, goodbye.”

But not everyone was cheerful. Marcus, 34, who like others declined to give his last name,
said he had grown up seeing the statues and as an African American had hoped they would
come down.

“But not like this,” he said. “It would’ve been nice to see this stuff come down without
having to protest for it. You shouldn’t have to kill someone and get a riot behind it to have
some action.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200612/page/1/textview 3/3
