2020. 6. 17. Loosening up: Local businesses prepare to reopen their doors.

Loosening up: Local businesses prepare to reopen their
doors.

Owners are divided on whether it’s too soon to bring back customers

The Washington Post : 29 May 2020 - A1 : BY FREDRICK KUNKLE, OVETTA WIGGINS AND IAN SHAPIRA

Vinyl junkies will soon be able to visit Crooked Beat Records in Alexandria, Va., and flip
through actual bins of actual record albums again.

   

a

But you’ll have to wear a mask. “We’re going to enforce it strongly — you’ve got to havea
mask on. If you don’t have a mask on, you can’t come in,” said Bill Daly, who has operated
the shop for 22 years. “It’s just safe for you, it’s safe for me, it’s safe for everybody.”

The specialty record shop, which opened in North Carolina before moving to the District
and then Virginia, plans to reopen Saturday with reduced hours and social distancing rules
in place. Like other businesses, it has been preparing for the resumption of business fol-
lowing months of government-ordered closures to slow the spread of the novel coron-
avirus.

As Northern Virginia, Maryland and the District gradually loosen stay-at-home rules that
have been in place because of the pandemic, business owners are stocking up on hand san-
itizer and putting up signs requiring masks.

But others plan to sit it out a little longer. Trim Hair Salon in Washington wrote in a social
media post that although D.C. Mayor Muriel E. Bowser (D) will allow hair salons to reopen
under certain guidelines, the staff at the Adams Morgan business believes it’s still too
risky.

“T’ve heard about other salon owners sneaking people in even before we were allowed to
open, and I just have a very hard time with that,” Mercedes Ortiz- Olivieri, Trim Hair Sa-
lon’s owner, said in an interview.

“Are we really making decisions based on commerce? It’s community health, not just indi-
vidual health, and I’m a community business,” Ortiz- Olivieri said. “I couldn’t live with
myself if I knew somebody got sick, and especially if they ended up in a grave situation. It’s
just too soon.”

But Booker Parchment, owner of Mr. Braxton Bar and Kitchen in Petworth, was among the
owners eager to see even a fraction of his patrons face-to-face again. His restaurant —
which offers everything from truffle macaroni and cheese to New Zealand rack of lamb —
has been offering takeout since the shutdown.

In the run-up to the District’s reopening Friday, when outdoor

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200529/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Loosening up: Local businesses prepare to reopen their doors.

dining will be permitted, Parchment and his team have been putting out several plants and
flowers in the patio area, plus a seven-foot topiary.

“We wanted to make it feel like a secret garden,” he said.

His staff members, of course, will be wearing masks. And he’s also paring down the hours
and the number of employees. The restaurant has spaced out tables so they are at least six
feet apart, and set up vintage doors as dividers to give customers a sense of privacy. Parch-
ment believes he can host as many as 28 people safely and comfortably.

“The staff is excited,” Parchment said. “It’s a sign of life, getting back to a state of nor-
malcy.”

At the upscale salon and spa Andre Chreky in the District, staff members are preparing for
customers starting Friday, and it will not be business as usual. Serena Chreky, who co-
founded the business with her husband, said there will be no spa or nail services. No wax-
ing. They won’t even use the blow dryers.

“It’s just cut and color,” Chreky said. “We're uncertain about blow dryers because of the
air flow.”

The salon posted a message on its Instagram account with an itemized list of the things it
has purchased to keep clients safe: “12 gallons of hand sanitizer, 1000 face masks, 24 face
shields, 3000 gloves, 2000 disinfecting wipes, 3 gallons of anti-microbial soap, a dozen
safety signs, and lots of smiles.”

In Maryland, where Gov. Larry Hogan (R) lifted stay-at-home orders earlier this month
but allowed jurisdictions to decide whether it was safe to resume business as usual in their
area, business owners felt whipsawed by the seemingly conflicting stances.

Robert Harper, who owns a vintage bookstore in Hyattsville, assumed Prince George’s
County would allow stores to open at 50 percent capacity when it begins lifting restrictions
on Monday.

After two months with his business’s doors closed, Harper said he was hanging “mask re-
quired” signs and taking other steps to reopen his shop, My Dead Aunt’s Books. A young
salesperson, who has recovered from covid-19, the disease caused by the coronavirus, was
willing to work the cash register, he said.

But then Harper learned that his business will be able to do curbside retail only, which he
said could be scarce in an arts district that thrives on foot traffic.

Stephanie Landrum, president and chief executive of the Alexandria Economic Develop-
ment Partnership, said the public-private nonprofit has hosted several webinars counsel-
ing city businesses on how to comply with the rules and guidelines of reopening.
Restaurants are learning how to configure safe seating areas. Fitness classes, which can
operate outside, might take advantage of open space in public parks.

Landrum said that if there’s a silver lining, it may be that a tentative consensus has been
reached to close part of Old Town’s King Street — a long-debated issue — to vehicular
traffic this summer to create more space for social distancing.

“Tt’s just a lot of details that are new to these businesses. But it’s also new to local govern-
ments and we’re all trying to take them in,” Landrum said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200529/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Loosening up: Local businesses prepare to reopen their doors.

Daly, of Crooked Beat Records, said the business might not have made it this far if not for
curbside pickup and online sales through a newly reconfigured website. He said he’s
thankful for its loyal fan base — many from the District and many interested in punk,
classic rock, indie rock and local bands — who have kept the orders coming in.

When the shop reopens on Saturday, there will be plenty of hand sanitizer and a shortened
schedule that allows staff members to clean the store on what are normally the slowest
days of the summer season, Daly said. The store will also allow only five customers at a
time. But those screen-fatigued music fans will at least be free to search for rare editions
of Clash, Nirvana or Neutral Milk Hotel records with their own eyes and fingers.

“Nothing beats that,” Daly said Thursday. “It’s great to look at stuff online, but to go into
a physical store and experience that — your brain’s moving a hundred miles an hour and
you’re able to look at stuff. You’re looking up everywhere and you’re saying, ‘Oh wow, look
at that — I didn’t even think of that band.’ ”

“T couldn’t live with myself if I knew somebody got sick.”

Mercedes Ortiz-olivieri, owner of Trim Hair Salon, explaining why her business is not yet
reopening

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200529/page/1/textview 3/3
