2020. 6. 17. Southwest Airlines CEO

Southwest Airlines CEO
It could take 2 to 3 years for traffic to fully recover

The Dallas Morning News - 30 May 2020 - 1A - By KYLE ARNOLD Staff Writer kyle.arnold@dallasnews.com Twitter:
@kylelarnold

Gary Kelly says the Dallasbased carrier is in “intensive care” from COVID19.

a a |
: is =" —

   
 

 

 

Southwest Airlines CEO Gary Kelly says the Dallasbased carrier is in “intensive care” and
what it looks like a year from now depends on whether COVID19 is still a pandemic, the
state of the economy and how many seats competitors choose to fly.

“We'll compete hard for customers, understanding it will be a brutal, lowfare environment
as there are far more airline seats, and there will be for some time, than there are cus-
tomers,” Kelly said in a weekly update to employees posted to Youtube.

Southwest Airlines has been more aggressive than other airlines through the pandemic,
pulling back fewer flights, even though it’s flying half as many flights as it planned before
the pandemic. But this week, the carrier also said it would fly a schedule for November and
December that matches what it flew last year in terms of flights and seats.

Airline leaders are trying to figure out how fast they will be able to emerge from the
COVID19 pandemic. At its worst in early April, airport passenger traffic was down more
than 94% from the year before. Passengers are coming back slowly, and carriers have re-
duced the number of flights as well.

When traffic does return, airlines will be tempted to fill up seats to justify massive over-
head costs, said David Banmiller, an aviation consultant and former CEO of

Pan Am and Aloha Airlines.

“Fares will be all over the place,” Banmiller said. “Do you come out with low prices to
stimulate traffic? And what’s the demand?”

Kelly told employees it would take two to three years for airline traffic to rebound to previ-
ous levels, especially on international flights.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200530/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Southwest Airlines CEO

Ticket pricing could also depend on how long airlines are forced to fly at limited capacity
because customers aren’t comfortable crowding into seats next to strangers. Southwest is
only selling tickets to fill planes to twothirds capacity and will do so through July, Kelly
said.

On Thursday, Southwest Airlines chief commercial officer Andrew Watterson told The Dal-
las Morning News that the airline sees an opportunity to gain on its competitors coming
out of the downturn, the same way it has done after past recessions.

But the future of airlines depend on when customers feel comfortable flying again, and
that depends on the state of the COVID19 crisis and the economy.

Southwest earned its reputation as a lowcost carrier partly because it doesn’t offer pre-
mium section seating and partially because it doesn’t charge bag fees. But other airlines
have become pricecompetitive and even cheaper in many instances, at least for economy-
class tickets.

Southwest is looking at major changes, though, including a need to trim down its work-
force as payroll grants and loans from the federal government are set to run out at the end
of September. The company has urged employees to take voluntary leave, and Kelly has
warned that furloughs may be required if passenger traffic doesn’t turn around quickly
this summer.

Airlines including Fort Worthbased American and United have outlined plans to employees
to reduce workforces. American said this week that it would cut about 5,000 jobs from its
management and support staff.

American Airlines CEO Doug Parker said the company will err on the side of being smaller
instead of taking a risk on being larger coming out of the pandemic.

Southwest has told unions that it needs to think of ways to trim expenses, which organized
labor groups interpreted as a demand for contract concessions.

Southwest, which flies mostly domestic routes with a handful of Caribbean destinations,
could recover faster if traffic bounces back more quickly in the United States.

One way to save money will be to fly its grounded Boeing 737 Max jets, which are still being
evaluated by the Federal Aviation Administration and haven’t been approved to fly yet. The
planes are about 25% more fuelefficient than older models.

“It’s the most costeffective plane in terms of fuel and maintenance and provides a great
customer experience,” Kelly said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200530/page/1/textview 2/2
