2020. 6. 17. Officer’s bail set in killing of Floyd

Officer’s bail set in killing of Floyd

TRUMP ASSAILS CALLS TO DEFUND POLICE

The Washington Post : 9 Jun 2020 + A1 - BY HOLLY BAILEY AND TOLUSE OLORUNNIPA

Protests

ae ae

Se
a

za

re

ad

ae

=

rt

==

 

MINNEAPOLIS — Derek Chauvin, the former Minneapolis police officer who kept his knee
on George Floyd’s neck for nearly nine minutes as he struggled to breathe and ultimately
died, made his first court appearance Monday — hours after congressional Democrats un-
veiled broad legislation aimed at reforming policing nationwide.

Chauvin, 44, was formally charged with second-degree murder without intent, third-de-
gree murder and second-degree manslaughter, with bail set at a minimum of $1 million.
The appearance came immediately after a weekend of peaceful protests in which massive
and diverse crowds of demonstrators demanded change, but it was unclear whether Mon-
day’s legal and legislative developments would satisfy those who have taken to the streets
in recent days.

As Floyd’s memorial service in Houston began Monday, the impact of his death continued
to reverberate around the country. The debate shifted from the widely condemned arrest
tactic that Chauvin used to the hotly debated issue of whether American policing requires a
top-to

bottom overhaul. While Black Lives Matter protesters have called on lawmakers to “defund
the police” and decried systemic racism in law enforcement, others — led by President
Trump — have sought to brand the movement as extreme and argued that policing does
not need broad reform.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200609/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. Officer’s bail set in killing of Floyd

Speaking at the White House while meeting with representatives of law enforcement,
Trump hailed American police as “the finest law enforcement anywhere in the world,” de-
scribing those involved in brutality as “bad actors” representing a minuscule fraction of
law enforcement.

“We won’t be defunding our police, we won’t be dismantling our police, we won’t be dis-
banding our police, we won’t be ending our police force in a city,” Trump said. “These
people do a tremendous job of protecting the citizens of our country.”

While Trump said he would consider ideas for how police could operate “in a much more
gentle fashion,” White House press secretary Kayleigh Mcenany said the president had not
yet reviewed the legislation put forward by Democrats. The Justice in Policing Act of 2020
would ban chokeholds, establish a national database to track police misconduct and pro-
hibit certain no-knock warrants, among a wide array of steps.

In another consequence of the protests, Portland Police Chief Jami Resch announced her
resignation, introducing as her successor Charlie Lovell, an African American lieutenant.
Resch, who is white and has been on the job for six months, called Lovell “the exact right
person at the exact right moment.”

The Portland Police Bureau had been criticized for its handling of demonstrations, espe-
cially after video surfaced of officers using tear gas.

The debate over policing, and racial inequality, has begun to shape the 2020 presidential
race, with Trump and presumptive Democratic nominee Joe Biden staking out starkly dif-
ferent positions. While Trump held a roundtable with law enforcement on Monday, Biden
met privately with members of Floyd’s family in Houston.

Trump and his campaign have seized on the “defund the police” mantra in an effort to
depict Democrats as weak on crime. The president tweeted Monday, “the Radical Left
Democrats want to Defund and Abandon our Police. Sorry, I want LAW & ORDER!”

As Trump was tweeting, his campaign held a call with reporters aimed at linking Biden to
the “defund” movement. Biden told CBS News on Monday that while he does not support
defunding police departments, he favors conditioning federal aid to law enforcement on
“on whether or not they meet certain basic standards of decency and honorableness.”
Activists and officials define the meaning of “defund the police” differently, with some
advocating wholesale abolition of police departments and others suggesting more modest
steps to shift funding to other government agencies and programs.

The policing legislation put forward by Democrats did not address the funding issue. Dur-
ing a news conference, some Democratic leaders sidestepped questions about their views
on the push to reallocate resources away from law enforcement.

House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D- Calif.) suggested that “defunding” was not an issue for
Congress. “That is a local decision, a local level,” she said. “But ... that doesn’t say we’re
going to pile more money on to further militarize the police.”

While the police reform bill is likely to pass the Democraticcontrolled House in short order,
its fate in the Gop-led Senate is far less certain, as is its reception by Trump.

The bill would ban racial profiling in law enforcement, mandate additional training and
require the use of body cameras for federal officers. It would also change immunity stan-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200609/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. Officer’s bail set in killing of Floyd

dards, making it easier to sue police officers. Mcenany said that provision was a “non-
starter” for the White House.

Rep. Karen Bass (D- Calif.), chairwoman of the Congressional Black Caucus and a co-ar-
chitect of the proposal, said the legislation has more than 200 co-sponsors in the House
and Senate.

Democrats released the legislation moments after holding a moment of silence for Floyd
and others killed in police custody. Lawmakers wore kente cloths as they knelt in silence
for 8 minutes and 46 seconds, the exact time that Chauvin held his knee on Floyd’s neck
before he died.

Meanwhile, hundreds of people gathered in Houston to pay their respects to Floyd, whose
death sparked the worldwide protests and elevated a debate about racism and excessive
policing to the center of the national discussion.

Mourners gathered at a mural near the Third Ward housing project where Floyd had lived
before moving to Minneapolis. They prayed and left messages and tokens of affection.
Members of the public were allowed to enter the Fountain of Praise church sanctuary in
groups of up to 15 for the viewing.

Diverse groups of visitors gathered hours before in the blistering heat to catch shuttle
buses from a nearby shopping center, and each group had 10 minutes to reflect before be-
ing ushered out, a restriction imposed to limit the spread of the novel coronavirus.

Some who attended said they did not know Floyd but were moved by the viral video that
captured the last moments of the 46-year-old father of two. In the video, Floyd could be
seen handcuffed and pinned to the pavement on Memorial Day outside a South Minneapo-
lis market where employees had called police about a counterfeit $20 bill.

A private funeral is scheduled for Tuesday. Biden will appear in a recorded video message
that will play at the funeral, according to his campaign.

In addition to shaping the presidential race, the protests over Floyd’s death continued to
make an impact across the globe.

French Interior Minister Christophe Castaner said Monday that French police would no
longer use chokeholds, following days of demonstrations in which tens of thousands
marched through French cities.

In Washington, Pelosi and Senate Minority Leader Charles E. Schumer (D-N.Y.) wrote a
letter calling on Trump to reopen some of the public space around the White House. The
White House has remained barricaded behind more than a mile of fencing that was quickly
erected last week after protests grew unruly.

“Lafayette Square should be a symbol of freedom and openness, not a place behind which
the leader of our Executive Branch cowers in fear of protesters who are crying out for jus-
tice,” they wrote.

The next phase in the demonstrations, which have largely been peaceful but have also in-
cluded bouts of looting and rioting, could depend in part on what happens in Chauvin’s
trial.

The former police officer is being held at a state prison in Oak Park Heights, about 30 min-
utes outside Minneapolis, and he appeared via a remote video feed inside a Hennepin
County courtroom.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200609/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. Officer’s bail set in killing of Floyd

Bail was set at $1.25 million — or $1 million with conditions, including the surrender of
firearms and a promise not to contact members of the Floyd family.

As a state prosecutor laid out the reasoning for the bail request, Eric Nelson, an attorney
for Chauvin, made no objections and did not indicate whether his client could make bail.
On the courtroom video screen, Chauvin was seen being led into a small conference room,
handcuffed and wearing an orange jumpsuit, where he was seated alone at a table, a tiny
figure on a large flat-screen television. The former officer said little — spelling his name
for the court record, listing his former address and specifying “yes” when asked by Jean-
nice Reding, the presiding judge, if he could hear the court. The proceedings lasted about
14 minutes.

He is scheduled to be back in court on June 29, where he is expected to make a plea. Chau-
vin indicated Monday he had waived his right to appear in person during court proceed-
ings.

Chauvin, who is white, was filmed with his hands in his pockets and his knee on Floyd’s
throat as two other officers — J. Alexander Kueng, 26, and Thomas K. Lane, 27, held him
down. A fourth officer, Tou Thao, 34, was filmed pushing bystanders back from the scene.
All four officers were subsequently fired and charged in the incident.

Kueng, Lane and Thao are each charged with one count of aiding and abetting second-de-
gree murder and aiding and abetting second-degree manslaughter. They made their first
court appearances last Thursday and are being held at the Hennepin County jail on $1 mil-
lion bail without conditions or $750,000 bail with conditions.

Defense attorneys for Lane and Kueng have sought to shift blame to Chauvin, a 19-year
veteran of the force. They say their clients, who were the first to respond to the scene, were
rookies and had been on the job for less than a week and had relied on Chauvin for guid-
ance.

Charging documents say Lane twice asked Chauvin if officers should roll Floyd onto his
side as the man repeatedly told officers he was struggling to breathe, but Chauvin rebuffed
him.

“What is my client supposed to do but follow what the training officer says?” Earl Gray,
Lane’s attorney, argued in court. “He did everything he was supposed to do as a police of-
ficer ... What was he supposed to do, let go of his feet and go grab Chauvin and shove him
off ?”

Thomas Plunkett, Keung’s attorney, made a similar argument, telling the judge that both
his client and Lane had tried to appeal to Chauvin “that this situation needs to change di-
rection.”

An attorney for the third officer, Thao, who arrived on the scene with Chauvin, has sig-
naled that his client has been cooperating with investigators with the Minnesota Bureau of
Criminal Apprehension, which is exploring state charges in the case.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200609/page/1/textview 4/4
