2020. 6. 17. Goodell said NFL was wrong for not listening to players fighting for racial equality,

Goodell said NFL was wrong for not listening to players fight-
ing for racial equality,

The Dallas Morning News - 6 Jun 2020 - 1A - By MARK MASKE

In a startling shift on a sensitive issue, NFL Commissioner Roger Goodell said Friday that
he and the league strongly support players expressing their opposition to inequality and
police misconduct and that the league’s leadership was “wrong” for ignoring players’
concerns earlier.

   

“We, the National Football League, condemn racism and the systematic oppression of
black people,” Goodell said in a video released by the NEL. “We, the National Football
League, admit we were wrong for not listening to NFL players earlier, and encourage all to
speak out and peacefully protest. We, the National

“Without black players, there would be no National Football League. And the protests
around the country are emblematic of the centuries of silence, inequality and oppression.”
Roger Goodell, NFL commissioner

Football League, believe black lives matter.”

Goodell’s message came amid the nationwide protests over George Floyd, a black man who
died last week in police custody in Minneapolis. It also came as the controversy over NFL
players’ protests was reignited this week by comments by New Orleans Saints quarterback
Drew Brees, who repeated his opposition to kneeling during the national anthem.

Brees later apologized, saying his comments had “missed the mark” and adding that he
would do less talking and more listening.

Earlier Friday, President Donald Trump said that Brees should not have apologized, calling
such protests disrespectful to the flag and country.

Goodell also spoke after a group of prominent NFL players released a video Thursday
night, calling for the league to express much of what Goodell expressed Friday.

“It has been a difficult time for our country,” Goodell said in the video. “In particular,
black people in our country. First, my condolences to the families of George Floyd, Breonna
Taylor, Anmaud Arbery and all the families who have endured police brutality.”

The protest movement began in 2016, when San Francisco 49ers quarterback Colin
Kaepernick refused to stand for the anthem to bring attention to racial inequality and po-
lice mistreatment of African Americans. Kaepernick has been unsigned since the end of
that season.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200606/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Goodell said NFL was wrong for not listening to players fighting for racial equality,

“T personally protest with you and want to be part of the muchneeded change in this coun-
try,” Goodell said. “Without black players, there would be no National Football League.
And the protests around the country are emblematic of the centuries of silence, inequality
and oppression of black players, coaches, fans and staff.

We are listening. I am listening. And I will be reaching out to players who have raised
their voices and others on how we can improve and go forward for a better and more united
NEL family.”

Patrick Mahomes, Deshaun Watson, Odell Beckham Jr. and the Cowboys’ Ezekiel Elliott
were among the players who released the video Thursday night about Floyd’s death.
“What if I was George Floyd?” players said on the video. Later, they said: “So, on behalf of
the National Football League, this is what we, the players, would like to hear you state:
‘We, the National Football League, condemn racism and the systematic oppression of black
people. We, the National Football League, admit wrong in silencing our players from
peacefully protesting. We, the National Football League, believe black lives matter.’ ”

The league wrote Friday on its Twitter account: “Players, we hear you,” with the video at-
tached.

Kaepernick settled a collusion grievance that he filed accusing the league and franchise
owners of conspiring improperly to keep him out the NFL. Goodell said repeatedly that
teams made their own decisions about whether to sign Kaepernick.

Attempts by the league to stage a tryout for Kaepernick in front of a large number of teams
last year unraveled over disagreements about the terms of the tryout, and Kaepernick in-
stead held his own workout for a smaller number of teams.

The NFL and owners reached a deal with a group of players on a social justice initiative in
the aftermath of a 2017 controversy, intensified by comments made by Trump at a political
rally over players’ protests and the anthem policy.

Fans’ attention on the NFL’S anthem policy gradually waned as fewer players protested
and Trump mostly abandoned the topic. The owners and league discarded a modified an-
them policy to which they’d agreed in May 2018. That policy gave players the option to re-
main in the locker room for the anthem and empowered the league to fine a team for any
protest by a player during the anthem but left it up to the team to decide whether to disci-
pline a player for a protest. It was shelved after the NFL Players Association filed a griev-
ance and contemplated litigation.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200606/page/1/textview 2/2
