2020. 6. 17. Comyn, Cruz stand by Trump.

Cornyn, Cruz stand by Trump.

Republicans defend push for military response; Dems slam attack on pro-
testers

The Dallas Morning News - 3 Jun 2020 - 1A - By TODD J. GILLMAN, TOM BENNING and PAUL COBLER tgillman@dal-
lasnews.com, tbenning@dallasnews.com, paul.cobler@dallasnews.com Twitter: @toddgillman, @tombenning, @Paulcobler

WASHINGTON — With Democrats slamming President Donald Trump for employing dic-
tatorial tactics against protesters, Texas’ senators defended his push for a military re-
sponse — and his photo op at a church near the White House after riot police cleared a path
for him with smoke canisters and pepper balls.

  

A handful of Texas Republicans in the U.S. House praised Trump’s actions. But most re-
mained mum Tuesday about an uproar that exposed raw divisions on race relations, the
president and the balance between free speech and law and order.

“This is a terrorist assault in our country, and rioting cannot be tolerated,” Sen. Ted Cruz
said on Fox News. As for the church photo op, he added, “It was strong and powerful for
the president to go there and say, we will not be cowed.”

Texas Democrats seethed at the spectacle of riot police forcing protesters from Lafayette
Park so Trump could walk to St. John’s — the “Church of the Presidents” — where he held
up a Bible in a show of piety and power they found repugnant and cynical.

“Dictators throughout history have turned their militaries on protesters,” Dallas Rep.
Colin Allred said on Twitter.

“The Bible is not a prop,” said Rep. Eddie Bernice Johnson, another Dallas Democrat, who
said she was “shocked” at the tactics used so Trump could visit a church “that he doesn’t
attend regularly for a photo op.” She painted him as both a coward and a bully for “hiding
in a bunker” and then trying to “deploy the military on American streets against peaceful
protesters.”

Trump’s Democratic rival, former Vice President Joe Biden, stood at Philadelphia’s City
Hall and asserted that Trump was “consumed with his blinding ego” and incapable of
healing divisions.

The extraordinary events on Monday night widened a cultural chasm already gaping in the
week since a white Minneapolis police officer kneeled on the neck of a handcuffed suspect
for nearly nine minutes. The officer now faces a thirddegree murder charge. Trump’s de-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200603/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Comyn, Cruz stand by Trump.

fenders echoed calls for justice even as they agreed on the need for an aggressive response
to violence in the streets.

Nearly a day after the confrontation outside the White House, the U.S. Park Police denied
widespread reports that officers used tear gas, claiming they used force only after protest-
ers threw caustic liquids and frozen water bottles.

‘Strong message’

“Not only should we demand justice for George Floyd, we should demand justice for these
innocent victims of this agitation, this chaos, and the looting we are seeing, the violence
around the country,” Sen. John Cornyn said, also on Fox News. “The president is sending a
strong and correct message that we will not tolerate it under any circumstances.”

As for Trump’s plan to invoke the Insurrection Act of 1807 to send federal troops into cities
to suppress riots, Cornyn said that when police and the National Guard aren’t enough, “in
the most extreme circumstances, potentially the U.S. military would be available. I under-
stand the president is sending a strong message to state and local authorities that they
need to use the resources available to them because we simply can’t tolerate this sort of
lawlessness.”

One of the Democrats aiming to face Cornyn in the fall, state Sen. Royce West of Dallas,
who faces M.J. Hegar in the primary runoff, said the senators’ stance “says how out of
touch both of them are.”

“We are at a flash point in this country” and “their leadership on this issue will be viewed
by the people in the state of Texas and across the country,” West said.

Noting that protesters outside the White House were peaceful and hadn’t violated the
city’s emergency curfew, he added: “The tactics that were used were very inappropriate. It
shows you exactly how illequipped this president is to be a uniter.”

At the Texas Democratic Party, spokesman Billy Begala also tweaked Cornyn for siding
with Trump, saying,

“The president’s teargassing of peaceful protesters and clergy yesterday was revolting and
infuriating, as was John Cornyn’s praise for them.”

Cornyn campaign spokeswoman Krista Piferrer hit back at West, accusing him of saying
nothing “while violent extremists were burning cars, looting banks and attacking shop
owners. ... Texans want leadership, not moral equivalency.”

GOP support

Some Texas Republicans rallied behind the president with enthusiasm.

Rep. Lance Gooden, a freshman from Terrell, called looters “animals” — a term Trump
has applied to gang members and drug smugglers — and he lauded the “efforts to step up
and put an end to this nonsense while protecting the rights of peaceful protesters.”

Cruz embraced Trump’s vow of a crackdown on antifa, a loose network of leftwing mili-
tants that conservatives blame for inciting violence. Asked if he was concerned by the use
of tear gas to make way for Trump, Cruz cited “rioting in cities all across our nation” —
ignoring the absence of violence outside the White House when tear gas was deployed.
“Everyone has a right to speak peaceably and exercise the First Amendment,” Cruz told
reporters at the Capitol. “What you don’t have a right to do is loot stores [or] light police
cars on fire.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200603/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Comyn, Cruz stand by Trump.

On social media, users dusted off a 2016 taunt that candidate Trump aimed at the Texas
senator, an evangelical Christian and pastor’s son: “You know Ted. He brings the Bible,
holds it high, puts it down, lies.”

Fourteen of 22 Texas Republicans in the House weighed in on Trump’s church photo op
and push for military escalation in U.S. cities — including North Texas Reps. Kay Granger
of Fort Worth, Kenny Marchant of Coppell and Van Taylor of Plano — even as some outof-
state GOP leaders chided

Trump for the force used to break up a peaceful demonstration near the White House.
“There is no right to riot, no right to destroy others’ property, and no right to throw rocks
at police,” Sen. Ben Sasse of Nebraska said. “But there is a fundamental — a constitutional
— right to protest, and I’m against clearing out a peaceful protest for a photo op that
treats the word of God as a political prop.”

Sen. Tim Scott of South Carolina, the nation’s most prominent black Republican and one of
only two in Congress — the other is San Antonio Rep. Will Hurd — also issued a stern re-
buke of Trump: “If your question is, should you use tear gas to clear a path so the president
can go have a photo op, the answer is no,” he told Politico.

Hurd did not comment on Monday night’s events but he did turn up in Houston, “march-
ing in solidarity with George Floyd’s family.”

None of the 22 Texas Republicans in the U.S. House condemned Trump’s actions. (One seat
recently became vacant when John Ratcliffe resigned to become director of national intel-
ligence.)

‘Insurrection’

Rep. Chip Roy of Austin, a freshman, was among the few who defended Trump’s bid to
ramp up military intervention. “Police officers have been shot, businesses destroyed,
homes threatened, citizens beaten and possibly killed, Secret Service agents put in the
hospital — all of which demand swift action by our nation’s leaders,” Roy said. In a tweet
he said: “We must grant authorities power to quell insurrection that risks life, property, &
peace.”

Woodville Rep. Brian Babin lauded Trump for “bravely leading America” and celebrated
the church photo op: “Trump walked to St. John’s Church — through some of the protest-
ers who set the landmark ablaze last night.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200603/page/1/textview 3/3
