2020. 6. 17. Cuban will mix optimism, reality in graduation speech

Cuban will mix optimism, reality in graduation speech
In address, he plans to advise students to keep expectations realistic

The Dallas Morning News - 11 Jun 2020 - 1A - By DOM DIFURIO Staff Writer ddifurio@dallasnews.com

Dallas Mavericks owner Mark Cuban says his commencement message to graduates Satur-
day will be one of optimism rooted in reality.

(4
*

fel

After spending months advocating for small businesses and workers during the pandemic,
Dallas Mavericks owner Mark Cuban will give his first commencement address Saturday to
thousands of Dallas County

Community College District students entering the most uncertain economy in a century.
His message: That first job doesn’t need to be a perfect job, it’s just got to be a job.

It’s a message that may be tough to swallow for brighteyed, soontobe grads. Especially
given that the more than 1 million U.S. students expected to receive associate degrees by
the end of the 2020 academic year find themselves powerless, an economic collapse of his-
toric proportions thrust upon them in the final semester of their studies.

Texas alone lost more than 1 million jobs in

April as the U.S. fell into the worst recession since the Great Depression.

Known for his takeitorleaveit style of advice for entrepreneurs on ABC’S Shark Tank,
Cuban plans to send an estimated 8,000 DCCCD graduates off with a message of optimism
rooted in reality.

“It’s not like it’s 1970. And you’re going to find a career at IBM, or you’re going to finda
career at Xerox and stay there for 50 years, until you get a pension and a gold watch,”
Cuban told The Dallas Morning News. “It just doesn’t work like that anymore.”

And Cuban should know. The last time the U.S. was facing an unemployment level of more
than 10% was right around the time Cuban graduated from college and entered the work-
force in the early 1980s as a bartender on Greenville Ave.

His advice will be aimed at graduates like Lauren Jacob, 32, who has been collecting unem-
ployment as she finishes courses at DCCCD after leaving her gig economy job when the
pandemic began. Having studied to become a paralegal, she grasps the gravity of the situa-
tion.

“What law firms are hiring right now when courts aren’t working?” Jacob said. “I don’t
even know if I want to go sit in an office with a bunch of people right now, either.”

Derek Martinez, a 23yearold who’s been training to become a nurse through DCCCD, is op-
timistic but uncertain if

hospitals will be hiring any time soon. He’s also graduating Saturday.

“Tt’s hard to feel useful as a new grad, Martinez said. “We’re still great, and we’re eager to
help. But this feels like something so ... almost above our heads.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 1/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Cuban will mix optimism, reality in graduation speech

The virtual ceremony and speech Saturday will be the first for Cuban — but not due toa
lack of invitations.

“T’ve always said ‘no’ to them. I just didn’t feel like I had anything big to say,” he said.
“This time, because of all the different circumstances and the kids not really being able to
have a real graduation, I just thought it was the right thing to do.”

Now worth an estimated $4.3 billion, Cuban didn’t attend community college himself.
Those familiar with his background, though, know he’s advocated for community colleges
for at least the last five years as tuition skyrocketed at state and private universities.

The Indiana University graduate famously said he chose the Kelley School of Business for
his undergraduate studies because it was the most affordable top 10 business school at the
time.

“I’ve been conveying the message that community colleges are a great way to start your
college career, and more often than not, the smarter way to do it,” Cuban said.

Cuban has emerged as a leading voice for Dallasites and workers across the U.S. since the
coronavirus pandemic caused the suspension of the 201920 NBA season. He was courtside
for a Mavericks game against the Denver Nuggets when he got the word.

Videos of Cuban’s courtside reaction went viral on social media because they were relatable
— incredulousness, followed by reluctant acceptance.

“The Mavs just happened to be the last game,” Cuban said, chalking up his outspokenness
to happenstance.

“T went to do an interview, and when I did that interview everybody started asking me for
more interviews. And, you know, I’m not shy,” he said.

Cuban said he thinks he’s had an impact over the last few months. He’s connected small
businesses to lenders and other resources in Dallas, Oklahoma City and Los Angeles. He’s
donated money to support business owners in the mostly black and Hispanic Dallas neigh-
borhoods hit hardest by the pandemic. And he’s lent his insight to nearly anyone who asks.
He’s hired an army of socalled “secret shoppers” to assess health safety protocols at re-
opened Dallasarea businesses and published the results. He’s marched alongside Black
Lives Matter protesters and the Dallas Police Department. He’s advised the Dallas City
Council and Trump administration on reopening the economy.

“That didn’t necessarily go very far, but at least they took [the advice],” he said.

Critics have argued these things are the least someone with Cuban’s wealth and influence
can do. Cuban said he simply has time on his hands.

And he wants graduates heading into an uncertain future not to stress — and find a job.
“No matter what it is, you’re going to learn from it and you’re going to take that knowl-
edge and you’ll be smarter about the workplace, you’ll be smarter about yourself and then
you’ll use whatever skills you picked up and use that to find your next job,” Cuban said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 1/page/1/textview 2/2
