2020. 6. 17. Black neighborhoods hit hard by COVID-19

Black neighborhoods hit hard by COVID-19

High case rates during pandemic reflUect historic racial divide

The Dallas Morning News - 3 Jun 2020 - 1A - By HOLLY K. HACKER and LAVENDRICK SMITH Staff Writers

While many Americans nationwide began working from home almost three months ago in
the face of a global pandemic,

   

 

Quinton Scott didn’t have that option at his job as a security guard. That’s how the 64-
yearold Dallas resident believes he contracted the coronavirus in early April, after a man
coughed on him during a shift.

Scott initially tested negative. But within a few days, he became so sick he couldn’t

walk. He then tested positive for COVID19 and stayed in the hospital for nearly a week
while doctors treated him with remdesivir.

Despite a lingering fatigue, Scott considers himself blessed to have survived. He’s ina
highrisk group on many counts: He’s in his 60s, had a heart attack more than a decade ago
and takes blood pressure medication. He is also black, and in Texas and the U.S., COVID19
has been particularly brutal to black Americans. They’ve been more likely than any other
racial or ethnic group to be hospitalized or to lose their lives, available data shows.

In South Dallas, where Scott attends church and has aided the area’s homeless population
for 30 years, he’s watched the predominantly black community quickly become a hot spot
for the virus.

“T was one of the lucky ones,” Scott said. “So many other people have died.”

COVID19 has exposed longrunning disparities in Dallas’ black communities, especially
poorer ones. It’s hard to shelter in place if you don’t have a permanent home, or you share
a cramped apartment with several others. It’s tough if you can’t pay for grocery delivery.
“When you don’t have the financial wherewithal, you can’t afford to be isolated,” said
Stephen Linder, a researcher at the University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston.
And that means more potential exposure to the coronavirus.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200603/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. Black neighborhoods hit hard by COVID-19

Nationally, the disease has claimed a greater share of black lives than any other racial or
ethnic group: Black residents make up 13% of the U.S. population but 27% of all confirmed
COVID19 cases. In Texas, they have also gotten sick or died at higher rates.

In Dallas County, the disease has also struck a number of predominantly Africanamerican
neighborhoods — especially lowerincome ones, The Dallas Morning News found by ana-
lyzing the county’s reported COVID19 cases and 2018 census data. Most of the cases are in
the southern half of Dallas, in neighborhoods that have suffered decades of neglect and
disparity. COVID19 underscores that historic divide.

‘T have COVID-19’

Not far from downtown lies South Dallas, an area that includes many of the city’s estab-
lished black neighborhoods. The Dallas Civil Rights Museum is here, along with the Dallas
Black Chamber of Commerce. So is the Juanita Craft House, named after the civil rights
leader and city councilwoman who grew up here.

The area is also one of the city’s most vulnerable. More than a third of its residents live in
poverty. Last year Dallas County named the area’s two main ZIP codes, 75215 and 75210,
among the county’s five unhealthiest based on life expectancy, access to medical and
mental health care, the rate of uninsured residents and other measures.

The 75215 and 75210 ZIP codes — which lie south of Interstate 30 and east of the Trinity
River — also have some of the highest COVID19 infection rates in Dallas County. According
to The News’ analysis: 75215 has about 130 cases, which works out to 7.7 cases for every
thousand residents, more than double the county’s rate. And 75210 has about 50 cases,
which is also above the county rate.

Locals say it’s also been difficult for residents to get tested, especially for those without a
car, and they suspect the number of actual cases is higher.

“We have some of the highest rates of diabetes and high blood pressure and asthma and all
the other chronic diseases. So, layered on top of the possibility of being infected with
COVID, that concerns me,” said Lasheryl Walker, director of community outreach at St.
Philip’s School and Community Center, located in the heart of South Dallas.

St. Philip’s runs a food pantry that was popular well before the pandemic. In early May,
dozens of cars stretched down the street, waiting to drive up to tents where several masked
volunteers loaded bags of milk, eggs, bread, produce and other groceries into trunks.
Clients without cars formed a separate line, many with grocery carts, walkers or strollers
to help carry food back home. In a given week, the pantry serves 170 households, giving
each 82 pounds of food. Another 120 people typically show up without appointments.
Mary Brashear, a retired hairdresser, has lived most of her 89 years in South Dallas. She’s
stayed healthy, but her soninlaw in Lancaster is recovering from COVID19. A former salon
client of Brashear’s recently died of the disease at age 71, she said.

She’s grateful for the food pantry at St. Philip’s, where she’s a regular.

“This pantry keeps me going,” said Brashear, wearing a pale pink mask. “I go out for bread
or milk if I run out, but other than that I’m in the house.”

The school’s longtime headmaster, Terry Flowers, recalled one client who worried she
wouldn’t be able to make her regular visit. “I’m at the hospital. I have COVID19,” he re-
called the woman telling him over the phone.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200603/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. Black neighborhoods hit hard by COVID-19

Still, Flowers said, the woman showed up the next day saying, “I did test positive, but I
need my food.”

Flowers said the food pantry had to turn her away. She’s doing better and has been resting
at home, he said.

In many lowincome areas like South Dallas, the ability to social distance and quarantine is
a luxury. The problems go beyond unstable or crowded housing. For instance, lowerwage
jobs like working in restaurants or retail or home health can’t be done remotely.

And if you don’t come to work, you don’t get paid.

Linder and his fellow researchers at UT Health Science Center have been studying a cruel
twist of the pandemic: Neighborhoods such as South Dallas, where a large share of resi-
dents already battle obesity, diabetes, hypertension and heart disease, are more likely to
suffer severe cases of COVID19 — the kind that sends patients to the hospital, lands them
on ventilators and might kill them.

These neighborhoods face more disease to begin with because of social determinants that
conspire against them, like not enough grocery stores with fresh healthy food and too few
doctors to help people manage their health.

It sets off a domino effect in which one chronic disease leads to another, Linder said. If you
can’t afford healthy food and it’s hard to come by, you eat worse. If you’re in a highcrime
area and don’t feel safe outside, you get less exercise. Obesity can lead to diabetes, which
can lead to heart disease and hypertension.

Few test sites nearby

Several South Dallas residents and community leaders said they’re not surprised to see so
many COVID19 cases in their area. But they believe the real numbers are even higher — es-
pecially with so few testing sites nearby or the means to get to sites farther away.

The City Council recently approved mobile testing for five ZIP codes in southeast and
southern Dallas, including 75215. Many households in those areas don’t have access to a
vehicle and aren’t able to travel to established testing sites, like the drivethrough ones at
American Airlines Center in Victory Park and Ellis Davis Field House off Interstate 20, near
Desoto.

For residents of South Dallas, they might as well be in a different country, said Flowers, the
St. Philip’s headmaster. Many residents don’t own a car. And even if you could take public
transportation there, you can’t just walk up to those testing centers.

“T absolutely think the real number is a lot higher,” said Rodrigua Ross, executive director
of the Park South YMCA. She noted that many testing sites (though not the two county
driveup ones) require a doctor’s referral. Many South Dallas residents don’t have a primary
care provider.

“It’s a community where we oftentimes wait until what’s a cold becomes pneumonia, and
we’re off to the ER,” said Chris Simmons, pastor at Cornerstone Baptist Church. “And so
people [have] had to ride out those concerns. And I think that ... contributes to the spread
of the virus in the community, because people don’t have access to testing readily.”

South Dallas has a community health clinic that serves people whether or not they have in-
surance — the Foremost Family Health Center, a few blocks from Fair Park on Martin

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200603/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. Black neighborhoods hit hard by COVID-19

Luther King Jr. Boulevard. But the clinic received only 10 COVID19 tests around the start of
the epidemic, which it quickly used, CEO Joyce Tapley said.

The center was among several in Dallas awarded federal dollars to expand COVID19 testing
— in Foremost’s case, approximately $200,000, Tapley said. Health center managers are
finalizing plans to begin driveup testing by appointment in midjune.

“Getting money to start doing the tests is a great thing,” she said. “I would certainly think
the more tests they did, the more people they may find are positive.”

Scott, the security guard who recovered from the virus, lives closer to Duncanville than the
75215 ZIP code but has attended church in the area for decades at Cornerstone Baptist
Church.

He has worked with the community’s homeless population for decades in jobs at the Sal-
vation Army and the Bridge, and he worries they’ re not receiving the services needed to
combat the virus. They’re instead surviving while living in crowded and unsanitary condi-
tions, he said.

“Nobody is testing these people in the streets,” Scott said.

Caring for homeless

At Cornerstone, Pastor Chris Simmons provides as many resources to the community as he
can during the pandemic, including showers for homeless people and expanding the oper-
ation hours for a recently opened laundromat. Cornerstone also normally provides meals
for those in need, and Simmons said the church has seen an increase in families seeking
help.

Simmons has been pastor at the church for 30 years and, like many, said he’s not surprised
by the number of cases in the area. Many people in the community must choose between
their health or their paycheck.

“A lot of times they will go to work while they’ re not feeling well because they feel like
they’re not gonna get paid, and that will create other kinds of problems,” Simmons said.
Flowers, the St. Philip’s headmaster, worries that reopening the state will hit neighbor-
hoods like his particularly hard.

‘When you open up, you give the signal that everything’s fine, let’s relax. There’s very
likely to be an uptick, especially in 75215,” he said.

“The data you have now is only a fraction of what is taking place.”

Many residents and leaders say they worry about how the community will bounce back.
Ross, the YMCA director, hopes good will come of this — action out of the talk about get-
ting better housing, education, medical care and food for all residents.

“It spurs us as acommunity to be really thoughtful about moving forward,” she said.
“How do we create something that addresses these systemic issues, so this population is
not as vulnerable moving forward?”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200603/page/1/textview 4/4
