2020. 6. 17. Sutton, former OSU coach and Hall of Famer, dies at 84

Sutton, former OSU coach and Hall of Famer, dies at 84
Defender Cannon weds during shutdown

The Dallas Morning News - 25 May 2020 - 1A - By ANGEL FRANCO Staff Writer angel.franco@dallasnews.com

Eddie Sutton, the college basketball coach who led three teams to the Final Four and was
the first to take four schools to the NCAA Tournament, died Saturday. He was 84.

 

(os " 3 ag ; .
i is at

The coronavirus pandemic might have complicated Reggie Cannon’s fourth Major League
Soccer season with FC Dallas. But it wasn’t going to stop him from marrying his fiancee
Kendall Harris.

“The ceremony was beautiful, we kept it to 10 people to keep it within the [CDC] guide-
lines,” Cannon said. “It was a beautiful scenery on a dock. This was so intimate, it meant
the world to me, having just a small intimate wedding where everyone you know so well is
there.”

Midway through March, the 21yearold defender and his bridetobe were faced with the
tough decision of postponing their wedding as nonessential services and events began to
be canceled.

A combination of luck, prayer and perfect timing helped the couple decide to move forward
with a small wedding on a family member’s property on April 18. That was two months be-
fore the big celebration they had originally planned for late June.

That audible was made possible because of a conveniently timed trip to the jewelry store.
“We were picking up the

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200525/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Sutton, former OSU coach and Hall of Famer, dies at 84

wedding bands for the June ceremony before we postponed it, and we picked up the wed-
ding bands the day before all the jewelry stores closed down,” Cannon said.

As the bride, Kendall said she initially took the idea of postponing the wedding hard. Can-
non proposed in December, which sent Kendall into planning mode almost immediately
after. But after leaning on her family and faith, Kendall said she would still get the best of
both worlds — the small wedding, which was officiated by her father, and the big party at a
later date.

A larger celebration is now planned for January.

“Throughout the planning process we found ourselves [to be] incredibly stressed because
we tend to think about how other people feel a lot,” Kendall said. “In the process we got
overwhelmed and kind of let ourselves forget what it is ultimately about.

“For us, I felt like it was a blessing in disguise. We’re still able to have the larger celebra-
tion in January, and we’ll be less stressed because we are already married.”

Now as newlyweds, the Cannons said they are learning a lot about one another. They have
moved in together and are learning about each other as a married couple. They are cher-
ishing this time spent with one another they wouldn’t have had if the MLS season hadn’t
been postponed.

“We are big believers in Christ and we felt it was divine timing from him,” Cannon said.
“With soccer and everything going on, it could be so hectic. You don’t really have the right
time to get married, especially with everything going on.

“There was this presence that came over us, that we [thought] we’re never going to have
another opportunity like this to fully enjoy each other's presence right after marriage.”
The Cannons no longer have to worry about a twohour round trip commute just to see each
other. Harris previously lived in Burleson. For the first time in their relationship, she has
actually been able to see her husband work out.

“Throughout dating and our engagement we only got to spend a few hours here and there
and not days at a time together,” she said. “(Getting to see] how hard working he is and his
daily routine is really awesome. I always knew that but it's cool to see.”

FC Dallas has been the first professional team in the area to resume practice in anticipation
for the resumption of the season. There have been voluntary individual player workouts
consisting of up to four players per field to allow the maximum amount of space needed for
players to comply with safety protocols in place. A formal return date for the season has
not been announced.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200525/page/1/textview 2/2
