2020. 6. 17. Butterflies before Dragon flies

Butterflies before Dragon flies

Rain is just one source of anxiety as Spacex and NASA plan for today’s his-
toric crewed launch.

The Washington Post - 27 May 2020 - A1 - BY CHRISTIAN DAVENPORT christian.davenport@washpost.com

cape canaveral, fla. — Spaceflight is a dangerous enterprise. That unrelenting reality un-
derlies every decision as NASA and Spacex near the hour when they’!l strap two veteran as-
tronauts into a spacecraft that will mark not only the first human launch to orbit from U.S.
soil in nearly a decade but also the first time a private company has performed the feat.

  

That mission, scheduled for 4:33 p.m. Eastern time Wednesday, is being celebrated as a
historic moment for NASA and the nation. It’s also an enormously risky endeavor whose
failure could be a major setback for a growing commercial space industry and a devastating
blow to Spacex, which has upended the traditional aerospace pecking order.

That’s among the reasons that weather now looms as the most likely obstacle to an on-
time launch. It has been rainy and overcast here the last few days with low thick clouds
that unveiled a stunning rainbow Tuesday morning.

But forecasters at Patrick Air Force Base still predicted a 40 percent chance that weather
would force a postponement of Wednesday’s launch, an improvement from Monday’s 60
percent, but still casting doubt on the schedule. And conditions at Cape Canaveral may not
be the only reason for cancellation: Forecasters are watching developments all along the
East Coast, where the Dragon capsule might have to ditch in the case of an emergency
abort.

Fear of lightning also could force a postponement under complex NASA rules that prohibit
a launch if the spacecraft is going to fly within 10 nautical miles of storm clouds that might
generate an electrical discharge. Rockets tearing through such clouds can cause a lightning
strike, as happened during Apollo 12 when the Saturn V rocket was hit twice, causing dam-
age to some nonessential components. The crew was still able to complete its mission to
the moon.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200527/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. Butterflies before Dragon flies

NASA administrator Jim Bridenstine emphasized at a news conference Tuesday his con-
cerns for the safety of the two astronauts, Bob Behnken and Doug Hurley, and said the ex-
pected presence of President Trump and Vice President Pence would not increase pressure
to launch if conditions are not right.

“We want people to be able to feel free to say, ‘ No,’ and not feel any pressure to launch,”
he said, adding that he had texted Hurley and Behnken on Monday and told them, “If you
want me to stop this for any reason, say so.”

There is no way to exaggerate the inherent risk involved any time people are placed atop a
rocket filled with thousands of gallons of highly volatile propellants. The danger is com-
pounded by the fact that Spacex’s Dragon spacecraft has never flown humans before.

In an interview, Elon Musk, Spacex’s founder and CEO, called the launch a “crucial step.
Can’t mess it up.”

He said he was optimistic. “The probability of success, you know, knock on wood, I think is
high,” he said. “But it it is not 100 percent. And so we’ re just doing everything we can to
think of, any possible way, to improve the probability of success, because this would be a
big setback if something were to go wrong.”

Paul Hill, a member of NASA’S safety advisory panel and the former director of mission
operations at NASA’S Johnson Space Center in Houston, warned that human factors can
lead to mistakes.

“Now is the time to be on alert for ‘go’ fever,” he said after the panel’s recent quarterly
meeting. “So much work has gone into being this close to launch, it can be difficult to re-
sist the pressure to accept some risk or trivialize some concern with less rigor.”

For all of NASA’S accomplishments, human spaceflight remains a relatively rare and ex-
ceedingly dangerous enterprise. Since John Glenn became the first

American to orbit the Earth in 1962, NASA has launched a total of 164 spacecraft with as-
tronauts to orbit, an average of fewer than three a year.

Two ended in disaster — the Columbia and Challenger shuttle flights that killed 14. And
many others narrowly escaped harrowing calamities, like the Apollo 12 lightning strike or
the oxygen tank rupture that threw the Apollo 13 mission into chaos.

Maiden flights of spacecraft with humans on board are the scariest. When the space shuttle
flew for the first time in 1981, for example, officials estimated the chance of losing the
crew was somewhere between 1 in 500 to 1 in 5,000. Later, after NASA had flown the shut-
tle many times, it found that first flight was far riskier than originally thought — the
chance of death was actually 1 in 12.

There are many key differences between the shuttle’s first flight and the upcoming launch
of what’s known as NASA’S Commercial Crew Program. The spacecraft and rocket are
owned and operated by a private firm, Spacex, not NASA. The technology has advanced a
great deal since the shuttle days; Spacex’s Dragon capsule is outfitted with modern touch
screens and safety measures, such as an abort system, not available on the shuttle.

And while the space shuttle’s first flight had crews on board, Dragon last year completed
what NASA said was a flawless test mission without crews to the International Space Sta-
tion that returned to Earth safely. Flying astronauts to the station may be a new feat, but
Spacex has flown 21 cargo and supply missions to the station since 2012 in the uncrewed

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200527/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. Butterflies before Dragon flies

version of the Dragon spacecraft. That’s given the company plenty of practice sending
spacecraft to orbit, and then chasing down the station and attaching to it as it orbits the
Earth at 17,500 mph.

Spacex’s Falcon 9 rocket has also proved to be a reliable work horse that is closing on 100
launches.

But spaceflight is governed by unforgiving physics, requiring extraordinary amounts of
energy to escape gravity. Launching a rocket is like detonating a bomb, but with the blast
controlled so it flows in a single direction.

““We’ve done everything we can to make sure that the rocket is safe and the spacecraft is
safe," Musk said in the interview. “But the risk is never zero when you’re going 25 times
the speed of sound, and you’re circling the Earth every 90 minutes. It’s a speed that’s dif-
ficult for people to even comprehend.”

The mission would also be the first time since the 1975 ApolloSoyuz flight, when Russian
and American spacecraft docked in orbit, that NASA astronauts would return to Earth by
landing in the ocean, rather than on land. Water landings have their own risk, such as
when Gus Grissom nearly drowned in 1961, after his capsule filled with water and eventu-
ally sank.

The space shuttle landed on a runway, and since its retirement in 2011, NASA astronauts
have been flying in Russian Soyuz spacecraft that land on the steppe in Kazakhstan. But
there have been hair-raising moments with the Soyuz as well. In 2018, one of the side
boosters failed to separate properly and slammed into the rocket, triggering the emer-
gency abort system, which sent NASA astronaut Nick Hague and his Russian counterpart,
Alexey Ovchinin, on a harrowing ride to the edge of space.

“If you do this business, you’re going to get your nose bloodied some,” said Gerry Griffin,
who served as a NASA flight director during the Apollo era. “Hopefully, you don’t kill any-
body. But if you do it long enough and fly enough vehicles, you’re going to have a failure.”
No one knows the risks inherent in human spaceflight better than Behnken and Hurley.
Since they were assigned to the Commercial Crew mission in 2015, they’ve spent thou-
sands of hours training for the flight and are confident, especially since Dragon has a ro-
bust abort system.

“Now, I will add that it is the first flight with crew,” Hurley said during a recent news con-
ference. “It’s the second flight of the vehicle. So the statistics will tell you that’s riskier
than, say, the 15th flight or the 20th flight of the vehicle.”

Still, he said he was “confident in both the Spacex and NASA teams. We’ve looked at all the
stuff that we need to look at. And when we’re ready to launch, we’ll go do it.”

The whole point of this test flight is to put the spacecraft through its paces and wring out
any problems before NASA certifies it for the operational missions the agency hopes will
ferry crews to the space station and back for years to come.

Boeing, the other company NASA is paying to develop a new vehicle to fly its astronauts,
suffered troubling setbacks late last year during the test flight of its Starliner spacecraft.
No astronauts were on board, but the spacecraft encountered trouble almost immediately
upon reaching orbit. The onboard computer was 11 hours off, making the spacecraft think
it was at a different part of the mission than it actually was.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200527/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. Butterflies before Dragon flies

Crews on the ground scrambled and then discovered a second software problem that would
have caused the wrong thrusters to fire during the spacecraft’s return to Earth, when
what’s known as the service module was to separate from the crew module.

Controllers on the ground discovered the problem while the spacecraft was in orbit and
were able to correct it. Had they not, however, it could have damaged the spacecraft’s heat
shield or sent the crew module tumbling off course.

Since then, NASA officials have said they should have been better at holding Boeing ac-
countable to the agency’s rigorous safety standards. And they are confident that after years
of working closely together to deliver cargo and supplies to the station and now crew,
NASA and Spacex won’t encounter any such problems on the upcoming mission.

But there are always concerns about the unexpected and the overlooked.

The space shuttle Challenger exploded on a chilly January day in 1986 after an “O-ring”
joint failed amid unheeded warnings about launching in cold weather. In 2003, Columbia
disintegrated as it was reentering Earth’s atmosphere after a piece of foam became dis-
lodged during the launch and damaged heat-resistant tiles on the wing. A subsequent in-
vestigation found a “broken safety culture” at the space agency.

In the past several years, NASA and Spacex have led investigations into a trio of failures. In
2015, a Falcon 9 rocket carrying supplies to the station exploded during flight after the
failure of a strut designed to withstand 10,000 pounds of force buckled at 2,000. A year
later, another rocket blew up on the launchpad after the failure of a pressure vessel in the
second-stage liquid-oxygen tank. And last year, during a test of the abort system, the
Dragon spacecraft exploded because of a leaky valve. Spacex also has struggled with the
parachute system that would guide the spacecraft to a soft landing as it returns to Earth.
No one was injured in any of those failures. NASA and Spacex said they have investigated
all the problems, fixed them and are now ready to launch humans.

“This endeavor is the culmination of not only years and years of experience, or time and
work, but hundreds of thousands of hours of tireless effort to bring us here,” said Benji
Reed, Spacex’s Commercial Crew Program manager. “And it’s all focused on the safety and
reliability of the system.”

He said that the mission was a “sacred honor” and that the company would do everything
possible to fly the astronauts “to the space station and safely bring them back home to
their families. Fundamentally, this is what Spacex was founded for.”

Outside experts agree the teams have prepared as best they could.

“T would say the risk is acceptable. But it’s not zero. Spaceflight is inherently dangerous, so
there is always risk,” said Wayne Hale, the former manager of NASA’S shuttle program.
“But I think that all the appropriate checks appear to have been done. I think appropriate
measures have been taken and having an uncrewed test flight was a big step.”

That said, everyone will be holding their breath the moment the countdown ticks to liftoff.
“I think we’ re all very appropriately nervous,” Reed said.

“Hopefully, you don’t kill anybody. But if you do it long enough and fly enough vehicles,
you’re going to have a failure.”

Gerry Griffin, a NASA flight director during the Apollo era

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200527/page/1/textview 4/4
