2020. 6. 17. GROMER JEFFERS JR.: We need big changes.

GROMER JEFFERS JR.: We need big changes.

The Dallas Morning News - 1 Jun 2020 - 1A - GROMER JEFFERS JR.

We’re familiar with this episode. An unarmed black person is killed by a white police offi-
cer, signaling the continued dehumanizing of African Americans and highlighting just how
far away society is from ending the systemic problems caused by oppression and racism.

The killing is followed by uprisings across the country, including unnecessary violence
that distorts the cause of the protests. Then there are promises of better days by various
leaders followed by the issue fading from public view — until a law enforcement officer
kills another black person.

“It’s aggravating, and that’s far lighter than what I can say without cursing,” said Rev.
Frederick Douglass Haynes III, pastor of Friendshipwest Baptist Church in Dallas. “It con
tinues to not only hurt me, but haunt me.”

“T’m sick and tired of the criminalization and the weaponization of black people,” he said.
“Our humanity isn’t recognized. We have a policing system that is completely unaccount-
able to the community it polices.”

The latest chapter in police violence against black Americans occurred in Minneapolis,
where last week an unarmed, handcuffed black man, George Floyd, died after a police offi-
cer placed his knee on Floyd’s neck for nearly nine minutes, despite the man calling for his
mother and complaining that he couldn’t breathe. Derek Chauvin, 44, was charged with
thirddegree murder and seconddegree manslaughter. Several other police officers on the
scene have not been charged.

Protests against police violence erupted in numerous American cities, including Dallas.
Most of the protesters have taken a nonviolent approach, but others, including anarchists,
have resorted to starting fires, looting and other acts of violence.

The politics of the protest should not obscure that police violence against innocent or non-
threatening people has to stop. Just as critical, the nation must deal with the institutional
problems like poverty in underserved communities of color. It all plays into the crime, de-
spair and disrespect encountered by the disenfranchised.

Not all minorities are poor, but they often are victims of the same stigma it carries.
Floyd’s death occurred at a time when the world is fighting a pandemic that has an outsize
impact on African Americans, Latinos, Native Americans and the poor. It showcases their
need for jobs, access to quality health care, affordable housing, better education — and re-
spect.

Whether it’s a pandemic or natural disaster, calamities have an adverse impact on com-
munities of color.

“It’s us,” Sara Mokuria, the cofounder of Mothers Against Police Brutality, said about the
impact of police violence and the coronavirus pandemic.

There’s a long history of police violence against people of color, and abolishing it has been
elusive. While each case is different, the deaths have all been senseless.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200601/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. GROMER JEFFERS JR.: We need big changes.

To avoid killing Floyd, all Chauvin had to do was let him breathe. Other incidents of vio-
lence were caused by the fear of black men and stereotyping of them as criminals.
Advocates for reform say policing polices should be radically changed.

Mokuria and her allies are pushing city leaders to reduce the 60% of the Dallas budget that
goes to public safety. And she wants alternative responses to mental health calls and other
situations that can be handled without police officers.

“The pressure will be on with every mechanism possible,” she said. “We will use every tool
we have in our toolbox, including the ballot box and protests.”

“We have to reimagine what we think is public safety,” said state Rep. Lorraine Birabil, D-
dallas. “Along with that thinking about what happened to George Floyd, we need to really
think about how we can minimize interactions between law enforcement and the public
when it comes to nonviolent offenses.”

Haynes, a veteran of the social justice movement, has similar views.

‘“‘We need the kind of moral imagination that does not tweak the system, but transforms
the system,” Haynes said. “I see this as another opportunity that I hope we don’t blow.”
On Saturday, Haynes said leaders had asked him to calm the protesters that have taken to
the streets.

While he’s a clergyman who supports the nonviolent tactics developed by Dr. Martin
Luther King Jr., the slain civil rights leader, Haynes understands the anger and frustration
sweeping the country.

“The only way you can get to peace and unity is through the pathway of justice,” Haynes
said, adding that he’s encouraged the police chiefs across the country have denounced
Chauvin’s actions.

The interactions between police and African Americans are often colored by fear and false
perceptions about how those in poorer communities live and act. If a community is defined
by crime and blight, law enforcement officers and others may view it differently from the
wealthier areas in communities like North Dallas.

Not only does policing in poorer areas need rethinking, but leaders need to come together
to help those communities become stable and prosperous.

That’s why criminal justice reformers and community advocates have to find ways to ef-
fectively continue their struggle, particularly after the attention from the Floyd tragedy
subsides.

“The sad reality of the work that I do is that this is every day,” Mokuria said. “It just
doesn’t make news every day.”

The incident has also brought focus on criminal justice reforms that are needed, including
ending the communitytoprison pipeline, stopping unnecessary arrests, and getting low-
level offenders and other people who aren’t threats to public safety out of jails that are
coronavirus hot spots.

COVID19 “has pulled what community organizers across the country have been fighting
for ... from the margins to the mainstream,” said Brianna Brown, the Dallas County deputy
executive director of the Texas Organizing Project, a group pushing to end mass incarcera-
tion.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200601/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. GROMER JEFFERS JR.: We need big changes.

Brown said that it’s now “mainstream” to discuss issues like paid sick leave, better health
care and a “universal, dignified economic floor.”

She said the nation needs to “come to terms with how symbiotic racism — specifically
antiblack racism” impacts institutions and then make structural changes “that will
reimagine our lives.”

Politics is part of most movements, and the best way to sway public policy is through the
ballot box.

The Dallas City Council oversees the Police Department, but city elections are marred by
low turnout.

“The need to elect people who are down to work with the community in shaping that new
world is critical,” Brown said. “The need to organize, join forces, make demands and de-
mand accountability has never been more vital.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200601/page/1/textview 3/3
