2020. 6. 17. Former Justice official Rod J. Rosenstein voiced second thoughts on a Russia probe decision.

Former Justice official Rod J. Rosenstein voiced second
thoughts on a Russia probe decision.

The Washington Post : 4 Jun 2020 - A1 . BY MATT ZAPOTOSKY matt.zapotosky@washpost.com

Former deputy attorney general Rod J. Rosenstein conceded Wednesday that, in hindsight,
he would not have signed an application to continue monitoring a former Trump campaign
adviser during the FBI’S investigation into Russian interference in the 2016 election, and
claimed he did not know of the significant problems that have since been identified with it.
The comment came at a Senate Judiciary Committee hearing to examine the Russia probe,
including flaws in applications to monitor former Trump campaign adviser Carter Page.
The Justice Department inspector general found numerous errors and omissions in the ap-
plications, and the department has told a court it now believes it had “insufficient predica-
tion” to continue the surveillance.

Sen. Lindsey O. Graham (R-S.C.), a staunch ally of President Trump, asked Rosenstein, who
signed one of the problematic applications, if — given what he knows now — he would
have approved it. “No, I would not,” Rosenstein responded.

Conservatives are likely to seize on the admission, and others from Rosenstein, as more
ammunition for their attacks on the Russia investigation. Rosenstein offered some defense
of steps he took in the took in the case — particularly his appointment of Robert S. Mueller
ITI as special counsel to lead it — but at times he was conciliatory toward Republicans
skeptical of the investigation.

After Graham asked if Rosenstein would agree there was ultimately “no there there” to
support the “concept that the campaign was colluding with the Russians in August 2017,”
Rosenstein responded, “I agree with that general statement.” In that month, Rosenstein
wrote a memo detailing the scope of Mueller’s investigation; the probe was far from over.
But Rosenstein seemed to stress at other points that his conclusion about the lack of a con-
spiracy between the Trump campaign and Russia came only in hindsight. He noted, for ex-
ample, that he “understood there was predication to investigate” when he wrote his scope
memo, and added, “We investigate people who are not necessarily guilty, and so I didn’t
have any presumption that these folks were guilty of anything.”

Rosenstein said of the Russia case, “I do not believe the investigation was a hoax” —
which seemed to directly rebut a talking point of Trump’s. But soon after, Rosenstein said
he could not “vouch for the allegations.”

“As we now know, the eventual conclusions were that Russians committed crimes seeking
to influence the election and Americans did not conspire with them,” he said. Mueller’s re-
port detailing his findings concluded there was not evidence to allege a conspiracy but that
the Trump campaign “expected it would benefit electorally from information stolen and
released through Russian efforts.”

Rosenstein said “appointing a special counsel was the best way to complete the investiga-
tion appropriately and to promote public confidence in its conclusions.”

“T still believe it was the right decision, under the circumstances,” he said. He added later,
“T do not believe that Mr. Mueller was trying to get rid of the president.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200604/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Former Justice official Rod J. Rosenstein voiced second thoughts on a Russia probe decision.

Rosenstein is the first of potentially dozens of witnesses in an effort by Graham to investi-
gate the investigation that upended Trump’s presidency and resulted in criminal convic-
tions for several of his associates and campaign aides.

Democrats have bristled at the probe, suggesting the Russia case already has been aggres-
sively scrutinized by the Justice Department’s internal watchdog and that Republicans
seem to be trying to undercut the legitimate work Mueller did because they want to please
Trump and help his reelection campaign.

The Justice Department inspector general last year lambasted the FBI for its handling of
the warrant to monitor Page, though he said information had been kept from Rosenstein
and other high-level officials before the warrant application was approved. Rosenstein
said he did not know of many of the problems, including that an FBI lawyer doctored a
document used as part of the process.

Some Republican lawmakers took aim at Rosenstein, suggesting he did not do enough to
ensure the accuracy of the application he signed. Rosenstein conceded he was not sure he
had “read every page.” White House press secretary Kayleigh Mcenany seized on that at a
briefing Wednesday, saying, “It’s really astonishing to hear from him that he’s not sure he
read every page of that warrant, but I suppose it’s encouraging to hear with his 20/20
hindsight that he wouldn’t have signed off on it.”

In a heated exchange with Sen. Josh Hawley (R-MO.), Rosenstein accepted responsibility
but suggested the lawmaker should focus on future fixes.

“T am accountable for it, but the question is, why did it happen?” Rosenstein said, adding
later, “Yelling at me is not going to solve the problem.”

Rosenstein was far more guarded in addressing another controversy that he was ques-
tioned about: the Justice Department’s recent move to try to drop the criminal case against
former Trump national security adviser Michael T. Flynn.

Flynn pleaded guilty in 2017 to lying to the FBI about conversations he had with a Russian
diplomat but later changed defense teams and sought to undo the case. Attorney General
William P. Barr tapped U.S. Attorney Jeff Jensen in St. Louis to look into the matter, and
Jensen ultimately uncovered FBI notes, which Flynn’s defense team has alleged show
Flynn was entrapped.

At Jensen’s recommendation, Barr decided FBI agents did not have a good reason to inter-
view Flynn in the first place, and thus his lies were not “material” to any case — a require-
ment to substantiate the charge to which he admitted.

Rosenstein, who was nominated by Trump to be deputy attorney general and confirmed in
April 2017, was not leading the investigation when the FBI spoke to Flynn. But he was su-
pervising the matter when Flynn later pleaded guilty and agreed to cooperate with
Mueller’s investigation.

Sen. Charles E. Grassley (R-IOwa) confronted Rosenstein about the matter, saying that at a
June 2018 meeting the two had, Rosenstein refused to turn over case-related documents.
“It’s clear you were misleading me, Congress and the American people when you sug-
gested we should be satisfied with Flynn’s plea agreement,” Grassley said.

Rosenstein responded that he was only reluctant to turn over materials because of the Jus-
tice Department’s long-standing policy of not giving lawmakers access to such documents

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200604/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Former Justice official Rod J. Rosenstein voiced second thoughts on a Russia probe decision.

in a case that is pending in court.

Rosenstein said he approved the case against Flynn because “the evidence demonstrated
his guilt, and he and his attorneys admitted his guilt.” He said much of what has been re-
vealed recently was “news to me.”

“T obviously didn’t know there was exculpatory evidence,” he said. Many legal analysts
have disputed that the new evidence exonerates Flynn.

Rosenstein also took aim at former acting FBI director Andrew Mccabe, alleging Mccabe
was “not fully candid with me” in the early days of his leading the bureau and the Russia
case in May 2017. Mccabe, Rosenstein said, did not for at least a week turn over memos
from James B. Comey — whom Trump had just fired as FBI director — documenting what
Comey saw as troubling interactions with the president.

In a statement Wednesday, McCabe said Rosenstein’s testimony “looks to be yet another
sad attempt by the President & his men to rewrite the history of their actions in 2017” and
noted he had briefed Rosenstein on Comey’s memos days after Comey was fired.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200604/page/1/textview 3/3
