2020. 6. 17. The first step: Governor gives nod to Northern Virginia.

The first step: Governor gives nod to Northern Virginia.

NORTHAM CITES NUMBERS OVERALL Region may relax rules Friday, but
it’s not required

The Washington Post : 27 May 2020 - A1 _ BY GREGORY S. SCHNEIDER AND ANTONIO OLIVO

Communities in Northern Virginia can begin easing their pandemic-related shutdowns on
Friday, Gov. Ralph Northam said, arguing that the region is seeing a decline in hospitaliza-
tions and the percentage of positive tests for the novel coronavirus even as the rate and
overall number of infections remain far higher than in the rest of the state.

Ts,

   

a \ # ey oh ue ‘? < 7% os Fe ’

Northam nouncement as Virginia reported a second straight day of spikes in new cases,
driven by big numbers in the populous D.C. suburbs. He also announced a new policy re-
quiring Virginians to wear face coverings when they enter public buildings or use public
transit, tightening what had been simply a suggestion.

“The virus clearly is still here, but overall the numbers are trending in the right direction,”
he said. Later, he added: “Just because you can open doesn’t mean that you have to open.”
The seemingly contradictory moves and statements highlighted the confusing nature of
efforts to both fight the virus and begin reopening the economy in the nation’s capital re-
gion, which has been hit hard.

Maryland Gov. Larry Hogan (R), like Northam, moved much of his state into Phase 1 of re-
opening on May 15, while D.C. Mayor Muriel E. Bowser (D) has yet to loosen restrictions.
She is expected to announce on Wednesday a timeline for a gradual reopening, with the
city having met benchmarks that have shifted over time. Both Hogan and Northam initially
exempted the D.C. suburbs from reopening because of the heavy concentration of infec-
tions there, while Hogan allowed local jurisdictions to opt out of reopening, drawing criti-
cism for leaving it up to local leaders to decide when to move forward.

Howard County officials said Tuesday that they will move into the first phase at the end of
the week, while authorities in Prince George’s and Montgomery coun

ties have not announced a date. Baltimore City said it would permit nonessential stores to

offer curbside retail starting Wednesday.
https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200527/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. The first step: Governor gives nod to Northern Virginia.

In Howard, retail stores, barber shops and beauty salons can reopen on Friday morning at
50 percent capacity, County Executive Calvin Ball (D) said. Houses of worship will be able
to hold outdoor services with up to 250 people, but indoor services remain capped at 10.
Northam said leaders of the capital region “want to be consistent,” but noted that “each
area obviously has their own challenges.”

His announcement about Northern Virginia marks the first step toward reopening a
metropolitan region that was singled out by the lead coordinator of the White House coro-
navirus task force last week as having some of the worst infection rates in the country.
The raw numbers continued to climb over the Memorial Day weekend.

Virginia reported 28 deaths and 1,615 new infections on Tuesday, marking the second day
in a row that the state posted record increases in new cases. A majority were in Northern
Virginia, with Prince William County reporting a county record of 290 new cases and Fair-
fax adding 357 new infections — its third-highest singleday jump since the outbreak be-
gan.

The spike increased the commonwealth’s seven-day average for new cases to 1,028 — 101
more than the previous peak of 927, logged in mid-may. The average in new daily fatalities
also increased, although new hospitalizations declined.

Health officials say the numbers are up because the state is increasing its volume of test-
ing, reaching an average of about 8,000 tests per day in part by offering pop-up clinics
that will test residents who have not shown symptoms or obtained a doctor’s referral.

As the numbers climb, the percentage of tests that come back positive has trended down-
ward — a key metric for Northam.

The federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has advised states to look for a14-
day decline in the percentage of positive tests. Virginia officials are tracking that through a
seven-day moving average. Occasional spikes in raw numbers — such as those recorded
Monday and Tuesday — will not alter their outlook if the overall trend continues down-
ward, officials said.

Northern Virginia’s positivity rate has declined from a high of more than 35 percent in late
April to 21.5 percent on Friday. The rate is about 10 percent in other parts of the state.
Many epidemiologists recommend that cities wait to reopen until they have seen two
weeks of 5 percent positivity or less. But health experts also warn against putting too much
emphasis on positivity.

“Positivity is not a perfect measure,” said Jennifer Nuzzo, a senior scholar at Johns Hop-
kins Center for Health Security.

The statistic can be skewed depending on how many people are being tested and where
they live. Testing only the sickest people will miss those who might not have bad symp-
toms, Nuzzo said.

But open testing, like Virginia has offered recently, also could be unreliable if healthy peo-
ple crowd out those at greater risk, said James Lamberti, a pulmonary critical care doctor
in Annandale who has expressed his concerns to the state.

“Oftentimes, it’s the ‘worried well’ who hear about these things and wait in line,” Lam-
berti said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200527/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. The first step: Governor gives nod to Northern Virginia.

In a joint letter to Northam on Monday, the elected leaders of 10 Northern Virginia coun-
ties, cities and towns said four out of six critical metrics for entering into a phase one re-
opening have been met: increased testing, adequate hospital capacity, and 14 days of con-
sistent declines in positivity and new hospitalizations.

They said they were close to reaching the remaining two metrics — adequate personal
protective equipment and increased contact tracing.

“I’m cautiously optimistic that we can go ahead and move forward,” said Libby Garvey
(D), chair of the Arlington County Board, preparing for a meeting where the county would
decide how restaurants can reopen. “I’m pretty confident that we’re doing well here in Ar-
lington.”

The letter said that “if the data supports it,” the region should also join the state when it
enters into the second phase of reopening — in which more nonessential businesses will
be allowed to operate, the limit on group gatherings will expand to 50 from 10, and only
residents who are more vulnerable to covid-19 will be asked to stay at home.

Northam had said he will consider moving to the second phase as soon as this weekend,
two weeks after entering phase one. But he said Tuesday that there was not yet enough
data to discuss it.

Jeff C. Mckay, chair of the Fairfax County Board of Supervisors, said he’s worried that the
path forward is not being sufficiently coordinated across state borders.

“As someone who has worked with a lot of our Northern Virginia colleagues to be uniform,
it is frustrating that there doesn’t seem to be that same uniformity between the governors
and the mayor,” McKay said.

Two other parts of the state have joined Northern Virginia in delaying reopening. Local of-
ficials in rural Accomack County, which has suffered a severe outbreak at poultry process-
ing plants, also have signaled that they are ready to move into phase one on Friday,
Northam said.

The governor said he is also clearing Richmond for phase one, though he reassured Mayor
Levar Stoney (D) that individual businesses and houses of worship can opt to remain
closed.

“If you wish to pursue additional restrictions on houses of worship, barber shops, or hair
salons, I encourage you to work with your City Council to take the emergency allowed by
the Richmond charter, which authorizes the City to ‘make and enforce all regulations nec-
essary to preserve and promote public health and sanitation and protect the inhabitants of
the city from contagious, infectious or other diseases,” Northam said in a letter to the
mayor.

Northam’s move to begin reopening even the hardest-hit parts of the state came along
with a tighter restriction on wearing face coverings in enclosed public places. Though he
had hinted last week that such an order was coming, Northam himself violated the spirit of
the policy over the weekend when he was photographed maskless, mingling with people in
Virginia Beach.

“T was not prepared, because my mask was in the car,” he said Tuesday, following several
days of intense criticism on social media. “I take full responsibility. People held me ac-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200527/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. The first step: Governor gives nod to Northern Virginia.

countable, and I appreciate that. We’re all forming new habits and routines, and we’re all
adjusting to this new normal.”

Northam said the mask requirement will be enforced by the state health department, not
police. Businesses that let employees work without masks could lose their licenses. Health
officials could, through a magistrate, seek misdemeanor charges against individual viola-
tors, but Northam indicated that he does not want to go that route. He said he would like
the General Assembly to consider creating a civil penalty for violations at an expected spe-
cial session over the summer.

The pandemic’s toll was not as severe in other parts of the capital region on Tuesday. D.C.
reported 109 new cases, slightly below its seven-day average of 129, and — for the first
time in 49 days — no new covid-19 deaths.

Maryland reported 535 new cases, its lowest number in more than a month. It also added 31
new deaths, which brought its sevenday average for daily fatalities to 39. The number of
covid-19 patients hospitalized in the state increased from 1,279 to 1,315, ending nine con-
secutive days of decreases.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200527/page/1/textview 4/4
