2020. 6. 18. PREMIERE EVENT

PREMIERE EVENT

Oklahoma filmmakers' critically acclaimed movie ‘Vast of Night' lands on
Amazon

The Oklahoman - 29 May 2020 - A1 - Brandy McDonnell

Amazon picks up Oklahoma filmmakers' critically acclaimed movie

Imagine, if you will, a small town seemingly lost in time, just waiting for some curious
souls to harness its cooperative spirit. That's what the largely Oklahoma crew of “The Vast
of Night” found in Whitney, Texas, where they made their critically acclaimed indepen-
dent feature.

“Tt was kind of already frozen in time, in a way, all ready for us,” said Executive Producer
Marcus Ross, a Minco native now based in Birmingham, Alabama. “The only way we were
able to pull off what we did was just people cooperating and volunteering their houses and
their time.” The debut feature film from Edmond director Andrew Patterson “The Vast of
Night” premieres Friday on Amazon

Prime Video.

Penned by Oklahoma-based writers Craig W. Sanger and James Montague, the sci-fi mys-
tery is set in 1957 in tiny Cayuga, New Mexico, where smart and curious switchboard oper-
ator Fay (Sierra McCormick) and hip yet brainy radio DJ Everett (Jake Horowitz) pinpoint a
bizarre audio frequency interfering with both their jobs. The teenagers embark on a life-
changing quest to uncover the cause of the strange sounds.

“It's super cool, especially because Andrew and I had been working together doing com-
mercial stuff for so long with our goal to make a movie. We'd tried a couple of times over
the years, and then we finally got one done,” Ross said.

Longtime goal

Over the past decade, Patterson has taken on an array of commercial video work across
Oklahoma, with Ross often helping out on his projects.

Since the film is set on the night of the first high school basketball game of the

season, the first priority for Patterson, Ross and Executive Producer Caleb Henry was find-
ing a small town with a vintage gymnasium. After scouting locations all over Oklahoma,
Henry eventually found the perfect spot in Texas.

“The gym was perfect. I don't know when it was built, but it hadn't been touched. ... They
had built a new high school and gym and everything in town, and it wasn't really being
used,” said Ross, who also worked as gimbal and camera operator on the film.

“T'd never been to Whitney — which Whitney is right by Hillsboro, Texas — and there
were many days when Caleb and I ... would drive around and scout old houses that we
thought would look good. Then, we'd just knock on people's doors and ask if we could
come by at another time and tour the house and if they'd be interested in us shooting the
film inside their house. ... People were happy and excited for us to be there.”

The school superintendent agreed to let the filmmakers repaint the basketball court to re-
move the three-point line — which wasn't introduced at the high school level until the

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/20200529/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. PREMIERE EVENT

1980s — and the police department was

happy to help out with the production.

“Then, we had an amazing art department that went through and painted signs and stuff
to hang in front of the old store buildings and on the walls and hung lights up. Then, we
just asked people that had old cars to bring them for the nights we needed them,” Ross
said.

“I think my sister went to every Goodwill store in the state of Texas trying to find
wardrobe for everybody.”

Period details

Costume designer and supervisor Jamie Reed, Ross' sister, said she certainly hit all the
Goodwills in Dallas, Fort Worth and Oklahoma City.

“My mom and I... would just fill up the car with men's sport coats and dress pants. For
women, we did a lot of the pencil skirts and cardigan sweaters, things like that,” said Reed,
who is based in Minco.

Although she researched *50s fashions for the film, Reed said she didn't watch classic films
or television shows for inspiration.

“T went to yearbooks. I'm from a small town, and I knew this was set in a small town. So,
my idea was to try to find ‘what would people in a small town in New Mexico be wearing at
this time?' They weren't going to be the latest trends and things like that,” she said. “I
didn't want a single

poodle skirt or jacket in the film, and there isn't.”

Critical acclaim

Despite its small budget, “The Vast of Night” has earned out-of-this-world acclaim,
starting with winning the Audience Award for best narrative feature at last year's Slam-
dance Film Festival in Park City, Utah. Amazon Studios announced at the Toronto Film
Festival in September that it had acquired worldwide rights to the film. Montague and
Sanger also earned an Independent Spirit Award nomination for best first screenplay for
penning the period thriller.

“It's just been really cool seeing people really dig it. It's been fun doing all the

different festivals and just seeing the response from the crowd,” Ross said.

With most movie theaters closed due to the coronavirus pandemic, Amazon made the in-
ventive decision to preview “The Vast of Night” at drive-in theaters around the country
earlier this month ahead of the film's streaming debut. Ross said he drove two hours to
take advantage of the unique opportunity to see his movie at a packed drive-in.

“It's a throwback film, and you kind of got a little taste of that era,” he said. “It's cool see-
ing that such a small, small group of people were able to pull off what we did. ... It's beena
big, fun and fulfilling experience.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/20200529/page/1/textview 2/2
