2020. 6. 17. AIDS activist Kramer dies

AIDS activist Kramer dies

The Dallas Morning News - 28 May 2020 - 1A - FROM WIRE REPORTS

Larry Kramer, the playwright who raised theatergoers’ consciousness about AIDS, died
Wednesday. He was 84.

fast 2]

 

Larry Kramer, a writer and activist whose angry voice and relentless, often antagonizing
tactics goaded public officials, scientists and fellow gay rights proponents to stanch the
AIDS epidemic in the 1980s, died Wednesday at his home in New York City. He was 84.

The cause was pneumonia, said an official of Gay Men’s Health Crisis, which Kramer
founded.

“We have lost a giant of a man who stood up for gay rights like a warrior,” Elton John said
in a statement. “His anger was needed at a time when gay men’s deaths to AIDS were being
ignored by the American government.”

Kramer, an Oscarnominated screenwriter, was a firebrand and a versatile writer whose au-
tobiographical plays The Normal Heart and The Destiny of Me were among the first artistic
productions to focus directly on the AIDS crisis and put it in the public eye.

He was nominated for an Academy Award for his screenplay for Women in Love , the 1969
adaptation of D.H. Lawrence’s novel.

He also wrote the 1972 screenplay Lost Horizon ;anovel, Faggots; and the plays Sissies’
Scrapbook, The Furniture of Home, Just Say No and The Destiny of Me, which was a finalist
for the Pulitzer Prize in 1993.

But for many years he was best known for his public fight to secure medical treatment, ac-
ceptance and civil rights for people with AIDS. He loudly told everyone that the gay com-
munity was grappling with a plague.

In 1981, when AIDS had not yet acquired its name and it had been diagnosed in only a few
dozen people, Kramer and a group of his friends in New York City founded Gay Men’s
Health Crisis. It was one of the first groups in the country to address the epidemic and grew
to become the largest AIDS service organization in the country.

In 1983, furious about the lack of progress against the disease, he wrote “1,112 and Count-
ing,” a landmark diatribe that first appeared in the New York Native, a gay newspaper.

“If this article doesn’t rouse you to anger, fury, rage and action, gay men have no future on
this earth,” he wrote. “Unless we fight for our lives we shall die.”

“With that one piece, Larry changed my world,” Tony Kushner, the Pulitzer Prizewinning
playwright of the AIDS drama Angels in America, later told The New Yorker. “He changed
the world for all of us.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200528/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. AIDS activist Kramer dies

That same year, Kramer split with Gay Men’s Health Crisis after other board members de-
cided to concentrate on providing support services to people with AIDS. It remains one of
the largest Aidsservice groups in the country.

In 1987, he founded the far more militant ACT UP. Its demonstrators shut down the New
York Stock Exchange, picketed the headquarters of the Food and Drug Administration,
surrounded St. Patrick’s Cathedral in New York and shouted down speakers at AIDS con-
ferences.

ACT UP’S protests helped persuade the FDA to speed the approval of new drugs and Bur-
roughswellcome Corp. to lower its price for the antiaids drug AZT.

One of Kramer’s frequent targets over the years was Dr. Anthony Fauci, the director of the
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and now a face of the COVID19 pan-
demic. But Fauci ended up admiring Kramer’s activism and the jolt it gave to the some-
times insular research establishment.

“There is no question in my mind that Larry helped change medicine in this country,”
Fauci told The New Yorker in 2002. “In American medicine there are two eras, Before Larry
and After Larry.”

In 1988, Kramer learned that he was Hivpositive, which added a personal urgency to his
activism.

In putting AIDS on the national agenda, Kramer seemed to be out in front of everyone.
Eight years before Kushner’s Angels in America won the Pulitzer Prize in 1993, Kramer’s
autobiographical AIDS drama, The Normal Heart, had been staged offbroadway.

In The Normal Heart, a furious young writer — not unlike Kramer himself — battles
politicians, society, the media and other gay leaders to bring attention to the crisis.

A revival in 2011 earned the best revival Tony.

Even then, Kramer often stood outside the theater passing out fliers asking the world to
take action against HIV/ AIDS. “Please know that AIDS is a worldwide plague. Please know
there is no cure,” the fliers said.

The play was turned into a TV film for HBO in 2014 starring Mark Ruffalo, Jonathan Groff,
Matt Bomer, Taylor Kitsch, Jim Parsons, Alfred Molina, Joe Mantello and Julia Roberts. It
won the Emmy for best movie.

Kramer was born June 25, 1935, in Bridgeport, Conn. He had a volatile relationship with his
father, a lawyer, who Kramer said called him “sissy” from a young age.

But gaining the confidence to talk back to his father set him on a path of defiance. “I am
not frightened of authority,” Kramer said said in a 1990 Los Angeles Times interview,
“and I find so many people are.”

He went to Yale, where he tried to kill himself in his freshman year over feelings that he
didn’t fit in. After graduating with a bachelor’s degree in 1957, he took a job at the William
Morris Agency in New York and began climbing his way up the film career ladder.

At the 2013 Tonys, he was honored with the Isabelle Stevenson Award, given to a member
of the theater community for philanthropic or civic efforts.

That same year, Kramer married his longtime partner, architect David Webster.

“Rest in power to our fighter Larry Kramer,” ACT UP NY said on Twitter. “Your rage helped
inspire a movement. We will keep honoring your name and spirit with action.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200528/page/1/textview 2/2
