2020. 6. 17. Housing: In hard-hit New England, jobless fear losing their homes.

Housing: In hard-hit New England, jobless fear losing their
homes.

Across the six-state region, housing struggles offer a cautionary tale as
government efforts to stave off financial ruin try to keep pace with the pan-
demic

The Washington Post - 26 May 2020 - A1 - BY TONY ROMM tony.romm@washpost.com

Carrie Duran didn’t have to scrounge too much when her rent came due in April. The 48-
yearold single mother covered the bill with the $1,200 federal stimulus check she received
that month.

 

been cut dramatically. She wasn’t receiving unemployment benefits in her home state of
New Hampshire. She had three kids to feed, a daughter with Down syndrome to support, a
car payment that hounded her so much that creditors called her five times on Mother’s Day
alone — an evergrowing list of responsibilities competing for her attention and her ever-
dwindling bank account.

“You have to think about what is the most important thing,” Duran said, “and a roof over
our head is the most important thing.”

As the coronavirus pandemic threatens to lapse late into the year, many families in New
Hampshire and across the sixstate New England region are coming to a similar, scary real-
ization: It’s never been easy to afford a home or apartment here, and it’s about to become
even more difficult.

With unemployment skyrocketing — and some federal financial aid weeks away from run-
ning dry — millions of local residents newly find themselves at risk of prolonged financial
hardship, perhaps even staring down the once-unfathomable prospect of homelessness.
Despite the U.S. government’s efforts to halt evictions and extend $3 trillion in aid, many
say they fear falling behind on their rent or mortgage and lack the means to put off some of
those payments until their bank accounts — and the broader economy — are in better
shape.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200526/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. Housing: In hard-hit New England, jobless fear losing their homes.

The financial burdens have troubled not only local families but also economists and law-
makers, who see in the making a potential crisis more than a decade after a wave of fore-
closures swept millions of Americans out of their homes. In New England alone, roughly
380,000 homeowners and renters are at risk of falling behind about $540 million in pay-
ments each month, according to the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, which found the re-
gion is one of the hardest hit by the pandemic.

The Boston Fed cautioned that its numbers hinge on the availability of state and federal fi-
nancial support, including the enhanced unemployment benefits and one-time stimulus
checks Congress authorized in March. Economists said the data offer a cautionary tale —
for New England and the rest of the country — about the financial devastation on the hori-
zon if the pandemic outpaces the U.S. government’s response.

“If we don’t see a dramatic resumption of employment, and we don’t see an extension of
those unemployment insurance benefits, then the scenario quickly looks much closer to
our worstcase scenario,” said Jeffrey P. Thompson, a vice president and economist at the
Boston Fed.

Earlier this month, President Trump told Republican senators he wanted to allow the en-
hanced unemployment benefits to expire in July. Without such aid, more than 1 million
families in the New England region might have found their homes at risk, the Boston Fed
previously found.

Duran, for her part, ultimately worked out an arrangement with the property managers
overseeing Harriman Hill, a low-income housing community in Wolfeboro where she’s
long lived. She’d cover a fraction of the rent due on her three-bedroom place this month,
then deal with the remainder later. But Duran said she fears she may have no choice but to
seek help again perhaps in June and July and August, adding to a growing financial burden
that she knows someday is going to come due.

“T think I’m not the only one who’s going to be in this boat,” Duran said. “We’re going to
be playing catch-up for a long time.”

In New England, the economic carnage arrived almost as quickly as the novel coronavirus
outbreak that caused it. The unemployment rate among the six states in the region — Con-
necticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Rhode Island and Vermont — surged
immediately, later outpacing the national average, the Boston Fed found in a May report.
Roughly one-third of Rhode Island’s labor force sought unemployment benefits by mid-
april, leaving the small state with the country’s highest rate of joblessness at the time,
federal labor data show. In Vermont, the job cuts ravaged the local services industry,
largely given the dramatic decline in tourism and hospitality. These workers made up
nearly 80 percent of the earliest claims for unemployment support in the state, according
to U.S. indicators.

Nationwide, 36.5 million have sought unemployment checks since the pandemic began.
Yet three of the 10 states with the highest unemployment rates in the United States in the
final week of April belonged to New England, the Labor Department found this month. Ex-
perts say the job cuts have hit low-wage workers without college degrees the hardest,
threatening their livelihoods most.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200526/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. Housing: In hard-hit New England, jobless fear losing their homes.

“It’s a depression for them. It’s a recession for everyone else,” said Brian Kench, dean of
the College of Business at the University of New Haven.

Many vulnerable families have benefited greatly from state and federal support. Evictions
and foreclosures largely are paused, and homeowners can postpone payments on certain
mortgages, such as those backed by Fannie Mae. Unemployed workers across the country
have additional dollars of federal stimulus at their disposal.

The actions so far have helped stave off a historic foreclosure crisis, experts say. In New
Hampshire, for example, roughly 70 percent of mortgages are “federally connected some
way,” said Dean Christon, the executive director of the New Hampshire Housing Finance
Authority. He said the extent to which federal lawmakers’ efforts benefit homeowners here
and across the country ultimately will depend on how repayment options are implemented
and enforced.

But renters increasingly represent a growing concern. Some families may be able to post-
pone sending monthly checks — but only for so long. Many renters simply may not earn
enough money to catch up quickly on missed payments, especially if they are forced to pay
them later in a lump sum at risk of eviction. That puts a strain on the landlords who own
those properties, adding to the potential for a housing crisis unless the government autho-
rizes additional aid.

“If you’re a household trying to make the math work, it was already a tight budget be-
fore,” said Stefanie Coxe, the executive director of the Regional Housing Network of Mas-
sachusetts. “Now, it’s even tighter.”

Outside Providence, Shanira Villafane had been saving for months, eagerly anticipating the
day that she, her husband and their 9-year-old daughter could move out of a local shelter
and into their own apartment. She recently had banked her federal stimulus check to pay
for the costs of the move, and Villafane enrolled in a Rhode Island program that provides
housing assistance to low-income families.

But the coronavirus soon upended her plans. Villafane, 26, said it quickly became hard to
find reasonable apartments. Not only that, she worried about her ability to afford them
over the long term, especially after the grocery store where she works slashed her hours.
Taking on a second job wasn’t much of an option, either, as Villafane labored to help her
daughter through the slog of home-school — all the while toiling to complete her own
coursework for a GED.

That meant Villafane is stuck in limbo, she said, at least for the time being.

“God forbid my job shuts down,” she said. “I want to stay where I’m at .. . even if it’s driv-
ing me crazy here.”

The plight facing renters and homeowners recently has caught the attention of Washing-
ton, where Democratic lawmakers have put forward legislation authorizing $100 billion in
new federal funds to help renters. “This pandemic has shown us how vulnerable working
families are to a single financial setback, and renters need relief now,” Sen. Sherrod Brown
(D- Ohio), its chief author, said in a statement.

But the bill is caught up in a fierce back-and-forth between lawmakers about how best to
respond to the coronavirus. Many in the party, including top Trump administration offi-
cials, recently have signaled they would prefer to allow prior federal relief packages to run

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200526/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. Housing: In hard-hit New England, jobless fear losing their homes.

their course before authorizing perhaps trillions of dollars in new funding, threatening for
now to scuttle any new housing relief.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200526/page/1/textview 4/4
