2020. 6. 17. Don’t let looters eclipse real issues.

Don’t let looters eclipse real issues.

Peaceful protesters call attention to rifts between police, minorities that
must be mended

The Dallas Morning News - 2 Jun 2020 - 1A

Peaceful protests have been and will continue to be an essential part of a civil society. Non-
violent protests can draw righteous attention and moral indignation to community, state
or national shortcomings. And such protests can appeal to the better angels of our nature
to treat all people with the dignity and respect they deserve.

However, in the days since George Floyd died in Minneapolis with a police officer’s knee on
his neck, wanton violence and looting across the country have shifted public focus from
the senselessness of Floyd’s brutal death and toward the ugly manifestations of chaos,
darkness and despair.

Nonviolent outrage about the behavior of Derek Chauvin and his fellow officers is some-
thing any decent person should feel. Looters and rioters are anything but righteous, and
we owe it to ourselves to see the difference and to make sure that the policing issues that
minority neighbors have complained about for decades are properly addressed.

Let us be clear. Violence and looting cannot be tolerated in a civil society, and those who
commit acts of violence are lawbreakers, not protesters. Each broken store window,
burnedout business and incinerated police car is an attempt to sever the compact that a
functioning civil society must maintain with its citizens. Behind each destroyed business is
a person who has worked hard to make a productive life for themselves, their family and
their community, but now are left to sweep up broken glass, account for stolen inventory
and wonder whether each store (already hammered by the coronavirus) can reopen.
Nonetheless, Floyd’s death reveals some broken parts of that societal compact: badly
strained relationships between police departments and minority communities. The differ-
ence is that peaceful protesters see a route to repair damage and maintain civil order; riot-
ers and looters see an opportunity in a time of heightened tensions to destroy and raid.
What is not yet clear to us or to authorities across the country is whether the rioters are
part of an organized group. Over the weekend, Minnesota officials first raised the possibil-
ity of farleft extremists, white supremacist groups and foreign influences taking advan-
tage of this difficult time in our history to sow havoc and dissent. We need to know exactly
why these protests turned violent.

But we must not conflate those who engage in violence and looting with principled
protesters who are working peacefully for a better society. To do so drowns out the moral
message upon which a nation can build, and gives in to the darkness of anarchy that no
civil society can abide. A civil society needs strong commitments from all of us to build
more inclusive political systems and break unjust patterns of exclusion.

As a nation, we must strengthen our communities, first by stopping those who would ran-
domly destroy them, and ultimately by making good on the societal compact of justice for
all.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200602/page/1/textview 4/1
