2020. 6. 17. Groundbreaking:

Groundbreaking:

The Washington Post - 12 Jun 2020 - Ai - BY LENNY BERNSTEIN AND MARTINE POWERS leonard.bernstein@wash-
post.com martine.powers@washpost.com

Former covid-19 patient receives lung transplant.

ye.

A former covid-19 patient has received a double-lung transplant, a surgery believed to be
the first of its kind in the United States since the pandemic began, medical officials an-
nounced Thursday.

Northwestern Medicine in Chicago said the recipient, a woman in her 20s who would not
have survived without the transplant, is in intensive care recovering from the operation
and from two previous months on lung and heart assistance devices.

Ankit Bharat, chief of thoracic surgery and surgical director of Northwestern’s lung trans-
plant program, said organ transplantation may become more frequent for victims of the
most severe forms of covid-19. The disease caused by the novel coronavirus most com-
monly attacks the respiratory system but also can inflict damage on kidneys, hearts, blood
vessels and the neurological system.

“I certainly expect some of these patients will have such severe lung injury that they will
not be able to carry on without transplant,” said Bharat, who performed the operation Fri-
day.

“This could serve as a lifesaving intervention.”

Surgeons in Austria on May 26 performed what may have been Europe’s first known lung
transplant to save the life of a covid-19 survivor, a 45-year-old woman stricken with a se-
vere form of the disease. China reported a double lung transplant Feb. 29. Bharat said he
and others in his field are not aware of another organ transplant of any kind in the United
States involving a recipient who had contracted the coronavirus.

The United Network for Organ Sharing (UNOS), a nonprofit organization that coordinates
transplantation in the United States, has no record of an organ transplant into a covid-19
patient as of May 29, spokeswoman Anne Paschke said. However, hospitals have two
months from the date of surgery to report details of a transplant to the Richmond organi-
zation, including whether a patient had covid-19, she said.

The United States has suffered a severe shortage of transplant organs for many years, with
more than 100,000 people on waiting lists for kidneys, livers, lungs, hearts and other or-
gans. During the worst weeks of the pandemic in March, the number of transplants dipped

even more, UNOS statistics show.
https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200612/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Groundbreaking:

But the picture has improved in recent weeks, and because the number of transplants per-
formed in 2020 was ahead of 2019’s pace before the pandemic began, the totals for the two
years are comparable, the statistics show.

Bharat’s patient, who has not been publicly identified, was on immunosuppressant medi-
cation for a previous condition when she contracted the coronavirus, he said. Perhaps for
that reason, the virus devastated her lungs, leaving physicians few options. She developed
secondary bacterial infections that could not be controlled by antibiotics because her lungs
were so badly damaged, he said.

“They develop these strange holes in the lungs,” Bharat said. “If you were to cut the lung,
it kind of resembles a Swiss cheese.”

As the woman’s lungs deteriorated, her heart also began to fail, followed by other organs
that were not receiving enough oxygen. She was placed on a mechanical ventilator to help
her breathe and later an extracorporeal membrane oxygenation device, which adds oxygen
to blood outside the body and helps the heart pump blood through vessels.

Doctors repeatedly tested fluid from her lungs to be certain she was negative for the
coronavirus before operating, Bharat said. By that time, she was even sicker, he said.

“This is one of the toughest transplants I’ve done,” he said. “This was truly one of the
most challenging cases.”

The woman spent just two days on the waiting list before an appropriate brain-dead lung
donor was found, Bharat said. Only a small percentage of donor lungs meet the standards
for transplantation, and at first, the woman’s physicians were not sure these would qual-
ify, Bharat said. But the Northwestern program was able to work with the donor’s lungs to
make them suitable, he said.

The woman, who is now breathing through a tube inserted in her trachea, is awake, eating
and communicating with family via a cellphone, he said. Her other organs have recovered,
and her long-term prognosis is good, Bharat said, but she faces a long rehabilitation.

The median life of a doublelung transplant is about nine years before the organs must be
replaced, but experts have seen transplanted lungs function much longer, he said. The re-
cipient is covered by private insurance for most of her transplant and hospitalization costs,
he said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200612/page/1/textview 2/2
