2020. 6. 17. Last call for small businesses

Last call for small businesses
PPP loans are better now and there’s plenty of cash remaining

The Dallas Morning News - 10 Jun 2020 - 1A + By MITCHELL SCHNURMAN Staff Writer mschnurman@dallasnews.com

One of the best government deals ever just got a little sweeter, and over $100 billion is still

available for any companies that have been left out.

How they're using Most PPP loans
PPP loans are under $100K
Tas companies thatreceived hare of total PPP loans by
Paycheck Protection Program loan site thinocight unt:
loans said they used the
money for these purposes

  
     
 

Prevert lyofts, furloughs 7i@% |Z
Preven 66% 5

   

PPP loans in the

bi t stat .
ee rae Sectors with the
Value of PPP loans in tee most

populous states through June most PPP mon ey

‘6. orn boilllicans. Value of PPP loans by major
bob sectors through June. 6 in

   

The Paycheck Protection Program, which launched in April as part of a huge coronavirus
relief package, allows small businesses to borrow up to 21/02 times their monthly payroll.
The federal loans carry a 1% interest rate and will be forgiven if a company maintains its
workforce.

Essentially, the loans can become grants, and the offers were so popular that the first $349
billion didn’t last two weeks. Congress quickly added $320 billion, and plenty of money is
still available — but only until June 30, the last day to get a loan approved.

Through Saturday, over 4.5 million loans had been approved nationwide, including nearly
362,000 in Texas, according to the U.S. Small Business Administration. The

average loan size was about $113,000, an indication that much of the aid was reaching its
target audience.

On Friday, the rules on PPP loans were loosened in significant ways, which will help com-
panies struggling to reopen their businesses. Borrowers get more time — 24 weeks instead
of eight weeks — to spend the PPP loan and qualify for forgiveness. They can get excep-
tions to the workforce requirement if employees decline to come back or business is re-
stricted. And if they must repay the loan, they can stretch out the terms to five years, up
from two.

The additional flexibility was approved overwhelmingly by Congress.

“Finally, they heard us,” said Tom Kenney, a Texas restaurant owner who lobbied for the
changes and appreciated the bipartisan response. “The clock was ticking, and it was al-
most midnight.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 0/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Last call for small businesses

Kenney owns Napa Flats Woodfired Kitchen, which has locations in Austin, College Station
and Tulsa. Sales are down by up to 60%, depending on the restaurant, and he borrowed
just over $225,000 for each location.

His initial eightweek period for using the loans would have expired in midjune, and only
about a quarter of his 160 employees have returned to the job. He would not have qualified
for much loan forgiveness under the old rules. Now he has a chance to rehire people later
and get the benefit.

“T don’t need people now; I need ‘em when business starts to pick up,” he said.

Even if his loans are not entirely forgiven, he’s not complaining. “If I didn’t get this
money, I wouldn’t have made it,” Kenney said.

Executives in Texas are using PPP funds for a range of purposes. Almost 8 in 10 said they
prevented layoffs and furloughs, and a majority said the money helped pay rent and other
bills, according to a survey by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas.

When the loan program launched, it was advertised as firstcome, firstserved. That led toa
run on loans, as one local banker put it, and many small businesses were locked out.

The Associated Press reported that at least 94 publicly traded companies and subsidiaries
had tapped the program, and nine had borrowed the maximum amount, $10 million. The
government said it was unlikely that publicly traded companies qualified for the taxpayer-
backed loans and said it would audit loans over $2 million.

Several companies repaid the money, including Shake Shack, Potbelly and Ashford Inc.,
which has over 100 hotels and had received nearly $60 million in PPP loans.

Between the additional oversight and the additional funding in the second round, it ap-
pears that most potential borrowers have broken through. In a recent survey by NFIB, a
leading smallbusiness advocate, over threequarters of members said they had applied for a
PPP loan and 93% got one.

In early April, loans were being approved at a rate of about $24 billion a day, said Robert
Klingler, a lawyer with the Bryan Cave law firm. At the start of the second round, roughly
$35 billion was being approved daily. In the week ended Saturday, the net new PPP lending
was about $1 billion a day.

“The only demand we’ re getting is from outofarea borrowers,” said Cynthia Blankenship,
corporate president of Bank of the West, which has nine locations, including its headquar-
ters in Grapevine. “There is an underserved, forgotten sector that would greatly benefit.
But the challenge there is financial literacy.”

Bank of the West handled almost 1,000 PPP loans, valued at about $87 million, she said.
One surprising trend is that many borrowers have been slow to use the money, instead let-
ting it remain in their bank accounts.

“T thought it would flush out, but it’s just been trickling out,” Blankenship said.

She believes many companies were worried about qualifying for loan forgiveness and
didn’t want to add to longterm debt. At the same time, extra cash is really valuable now,
even for companies surviving the pandemic.

‘We’ re OK on June 8, but where will we be on Sept. 8?” said Allan Peiser, managing partner
at Goldin Peiser & Peiser, an accounting and advising firm in Dallas. “It’s the uncertainty
that’s so disconcerting.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 0/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Last call for small businesses

His firm, which has about 75 employees, borrowed just over $1 million in a PPP loan. He
said the company hasn’t laid off or furloughed workers, and hasn’t cut salaries.

“There’s no question that having excess liquidity gave us more confidence about keeping
the workforce,” Peiser said.

His advice to clients is to apply for the money, especially with the many additional ways to
qualify for loan forgiveness. On Saturday, over $130 billion was still available in the federal
program.

“Tf it throws you a lifeline and gets you through this, that’s a good thing,” Peiser said.
“Even if you forget the forgiveness, 1% interest is a pretty good deal — especially if it
keeps you viable.”

Many companies and bankers are pushing for another improvement. To have a loan for-
given, a borrower must complete an 11page application and submit many pages of docu-
mentation.

There are proposals to waive the paperwork for smaller loans — less than $250,000 or
$350,000. That would exclude about 90% of borrowers, depending where the line was
drawn, and would ease the regulatory burden on companies and lenders.

Andy Ellard, coowner and general manager of Manda Machine Co. in Dallas, borrowed
$204,000 in a PPP loan. His company has added one worker in the past eight weeks, so
he’s certain it qualifies for loan forgiveness. Still, he’s balking at starting the lengthy ap-
plication.

“It’s very confusing, and I don’t know if I should bother filling it out,” Ellard said. “I don’t
want to spend hours completing the paperwork and generating all the payroll data if it’s
not gonna be required.”

If that change happens, companies would have one more reason to tap the federal bounty.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 0/page/1/textview 3/3
