2020. 6. 17. Dallas ISD

Dallas ISD
Trustees, leaders plan to meet on ways to fix inequities in district

The Dallas Morning News - 6 Jun 2020 - 1A - By CORBETT SMITH Staff Writer corbettsmith@dallasnews.com Twitter:
@corbetismithdmn

wants inequities addressed.

Black lives matter in the Dallas Independent School District.

During a special meeting Friday afternoon, the school board unanimously passed a resolu-
tion “declaring unequivocally that the lives of black students and black people” in the
community matter.

The resolution also asked that the district administration and the board reconvene in 30
days and begin work to address various inequities for DISD’S black students, on issues
such as overrepresentation in discipline statistics and underrepresentation in Advanced
Placement classes and talented and gifted programming.

About 21% of DISD’S enrollment is black, accounting for over 32,000 students.

While DISD has made strides in recent years to narrow academic gaps with the state aver-
age on standardized tests, its black students trail the district’s overall performance —
across all grade levels and tests.

All of DISD’S trustees enthusiastically supported the effort.

“We have to move beyond incremental steps,” board President Justin Henry said. “We
have too much work to do, and heavy loads to lift, and we have to be careful with what
we’re doing.”

Both Henry and DISD Superintendent Michael Hinojosa put out statements earlier this
week condemning the Minneapolis police’s killing of Houston graduate George Floyd.
Leaders in other area school districts did as well, including Richardson ISD’S Jeannie Stone
and Fort Worth ISD’S Kent Scribner.

Henry, in his statement, called for the district to move beyond its efforts in diversity and
inclusion and commit itself to antiracism work and racial justice.

‘We must demand the change we wish to see,” Henry wrote. “But, we cannot stop there.
We must also be that change.”

With the help of fellow trustees Maxie Johnson and Joyce Foreman, and some revisions by
fellow lawyer and trustee Dan Micciche, Henry drafted the resolution, which acknowledged
some of the innovative work Dallas has been doing on redressing racial inequities — such
as the 2017 adoption of an equity policy and the subsequent creation of a racial equity of-
fice within the district — while asking for more.

“We are the system,” Henry told trustees after the vote. “We have a choice right now: If
we’re going to fix historical issues with this system, if we’re going to be explicitly anti-
racist, or if we’re going to continue with the status quo.”

Hinojosa said he wholeheartedly supported the resolution.

“While we’ve made a lot of progress, the status quo is not acceptable,” he said. “We need
to do more.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200606/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Dallas ISD

A dozen speakers took part in public comment before the vote to offer their support or cri-
tique of the resolution, including former DISD board member Bernadette Nutall.

Isaac Steen said that while he understood the thrust behind the message, he didn’t know
why trustees were considering a resolution when the district should have already been
committed to helping black kids.

“Tt shouldn’t take the death of a man for us to start looking at doing right by black peo-
ple,” he said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200606/page/1/textview 2/2
