2020. 6. 16. A somber Memorial Day, a day of contrasts

A somber Memorial Day, a day of contrasts
Masked and not, Biden and Trump pay tribute as virus deaths near 100,000

The Washington Post : 26 May 2020 - A1 - BY ELLEN NAKASHIMA

Memorial Day 2020 offered an array of contrasts as some Americans sheltered in their
homes, others flocked to beaches and pools, and the nation’s political leaders honored
generations of war dead, with former vice president Joe Biden wearing a mask and Presi-
dent Trump going without.

  

fe

The disparate approaches played out as the country’s reported death toll from the coron-
avirus edged closer to 100,000.

Trump took part in a wreath-laying ceremony at Arlington National Cemetery and later
gave remarks at Fort Mchenry in Baltimore to honor those who have given their lives in
wars past and those fighting today on the front lines of the pandemic.

“As one nation we mourn alongside every single family who has lost loved ones, including
the families of our great veterans,” Trump said. “Together we will vanquish the virus and
America will rise from this crisis to new and even greater heights.”

Biden emerged from his home for the first time since mid-march to lay a wreath at the
Delaware Memorial Bridge Veterans Memorial Park.

“Never forget the sacrifices that these men and women made,” said Biden, Trump’s pre-
sumptive rival in November, as he left the memorial. “Never, ever, forget.”

The somber gestures felt more removed than usual from the summer kickoff of crowds
flocking to beaches and holiday resorts as Americans this year sought to loosen the shack-
les of public health lockdowns aimed at preventing the pandemic from claiming even more
lives.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200526/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 16. A somber Memorial Day, a day of contrasts

Across the country, a majority of states relaxed restrictions ahead of the Memorial Day
weekend, prompting a new wave of challenges over public gatherings and sparking fresh
warnings from state officials fearing new instances of community spread.

In Ocean City, Md., videos showed visitors thronging the boardwalk, only some wearing
masks. From Newport Beach, Calif., to the Tampa area along Florida’s Gulf Coast, crowds
were sometimes dense — in the latter case, forcing authorities to close jammed parking
lots.

In midtown Houston on Saturday, more than 100 partygoers packed into a swimming pool
area at a club, flouting social distancing orders to maintain space or wear masks a day after
Texas Gov. Greg Abbott (R) eased restrictions on bars and restaurants.

Another weekend video showed a crammed pool at Lake of the Ozarks, prompting Randall
Williams, director of the Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services, to warn on
Monday that such behavior could have “longlasting and tragic” results.

Flags flew at half-staff at the White House and other public buildings to honor the Ameri-
cans who have died of covid-19 — the number now eclipsing the combined total of U.S.
deaths from wars in Vietnam, the Persian Gulf, Iraq and Afghanistan.

At Arlington Cemetery, Trump touched a large wreath of red, white and lavender flowers
before the Tomb of the Unknowns, then saluted. The cemetery has been closed to the pub-
lic for months because of the pandemic.

At Fort Mchenry, he likened the service of American soldiers who repelled a British assault
during the War of 1812 to the “tens of thousands of service members and national guards-
men” who are caring for patients and delivering supplies during the pandemic.

Again, the president wore no mask, a deliberate defiance of guidance from his own public
health officials, as he seeks to portray a picture of a country returning to normal despite
the ravages of the pandemic. More than 38 million Americans are out of work, and Trump
himself has said the economic recovery probably will not happen until after November.
Before heading to Arlington in the morning, Trump fired off some tweets, berating “The
Fake & Totally Corrupt News” for reporting on his weekend golf outings despite the
mounting death toll. He defended his recreation as getting “a little exercise” and as “my
first golf in almost ... 3 months.”

He also took a swipe at former president Barack Obama, saying the media, which he at-
tacked as “sick” and “deranged,” do not mention “all the time Obama spent on the golf
course.” In 2014, Trump criticized Obama for playing golf when there were two confirmed
cases of Ebola in the United States.

In an even earlier tweet Monday morning, Trump threatened to move the Republican Na-
tional Convention from Charlotte because North Carolina’s Democratic governor, Roy
Cooper, is “still in Shutdown mood & unable to guarantee that by August we will be al-
lowed ... ..full attendance in the Arena.”

Trump had earlier suggested that the convention, scheduled for Aug. 24-27, could be
moved to Florida. Gov. Ron Desantis (R) has begun reopening much of that state.

The president’s push to encourage states to relax restrictions — on Friday he ordered
states to allow churches to reopen “right away” — has been met with words of caution
from public health officials.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200526/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 16. A somber Memorial Day, a day of contrasts

“With the country starting to open up this holiday weekend, I again remind everyone that
the coronavirus is not yet contained,” Food and Drug Administration Commissioner
Stephen Hahn said on Twitter on Sunday. “It is up to every individual to protect them-
selves and their community. Social distancing, hand washing and wearing masks protect
us all.”

In New York, the state hit hardest by the coronavirus, Memorial Day was marked with car
convoys and small ceremonies instead of big parades. In a year that marks the 75th an-
niversary of the end of World War II, veterans wore masks and saluted while standing at
socially distanced intervals. At the Intrepid Sea, Air & Space Museum in Manhattan, Gov.
Andrew M. Cuomo (D), wearing a mask, honored both veterans and essential workers on
an occasion he called “especially poignant and powerful.”

Even before the busy holiday weekend, some experts were warning of a second wave of
coronavirus infections across the Midwest and South. A new study estimates the virus,
which has infected at least 1.6 million people in the United States, may still be spreading at
epidemic rates in 24 states.

Democratic leaders in Congress said the national coronavirus testing strategy released
Sunday by the Trump administration is “disappointing” and offloads wide-scale testing
responsibility to the states.

House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D- Calif.), Senate Minority Leader Charles E. Schumer (D-
N.Y.), Sen. Patty Murray ( Wash.), ranking Democrat on the Health, Education, Labor, and
Pensions Committee, and Rep. Frank Pallone Jr. (D-N. J.), chair of the House Energy and
Commerce Committee, issued a statement Monday saying the administration still lacks a
“serious plan” for scaling up testing to mitigate spread and facilitate the reopening of the
economy.

“This disappointing report confirms that President Trump’s national testing strategy is to
deny the truth that there aren’t enough tests and supplies, reject responsibility and dump
the burden onto the states,” the leaders wrote.

In the report, federal health officials pledged to acquire 100 million swabs and 100 million
tubes of what’s known as viral transport media — the chemicals used to preserve test
specimens — to distribute to states to conduct their own testing. States would be tasked
with finding additional testing materials if their needs outstrip what federal health offi-
cials supply.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200526/page/1/textview 3/3
