2020. 6. 17. President Donald Trump blasts China

President Donald Trump blasts China
President to cut funds to agency leading vaccine development

The Dallas Morning News - 30 May 2020 - 1A - By BEN FOX

on everything from

the WHO to Hong Kong and visas.

WASHINGTON — President Donald Trump announced Friday that he would withdraw
funding from the World Health Organization, end Hong Kong’s special trade status and
suspend visas of Chinese graduate students suspected of conducting research on behalf of
their government

— escalating tensions with China that have surged during the coronavirus pandemic.
Trump has been expressing anger at the World Health Organization for weeks over what he
has portrayed as an inadequate response to the initial outbreak of the virus in China’s
Wuhan province late last year.

The president said in a brief White House announcement that Chinese officials “ignored”
their reporting obligations to the WHO and pressured the organization to mislead the pub-
lic about an outbreak that has now killed more than 100,000 people in the United States.
“We have detailed the reforms that it must make and engaged with them directly, but they
have refused to act,” the president said. “Because they have failed to make the requested
and greatly needed reforms, we will be today terminating the relationship.”

The U.S. is the largest source of financial support for the WHO, and its exit is expec

ted to significantly weaken the organization. Trump said the U.S. would be “redirecting”
the money to “other worldwide and deserving urgent global public health needs,” without
providing specifics.

He noted that the U.S. contributes about $450 million to the world body, while China pro-
vides about $40 million.

Cuts in a crisis

Critics of the administration’s decision to cut funding called it misguided, saying it would
undermine an important institution that is leading vaccine development efforts and drug
trials to address the COVID19 outbreak.

“Severing ties with the World Health Organization serves no logical purpose and makes
finding a way out of this public health crisis dramatically more challenging,” said Dr. Pa-
trice Harris, president of the American Medical Association.

Sen. Chris Murphy called it a distraction that would “hand over” the organization to China.
“Leaving castrates our ability to stop future pandemics and elevates China as the world’s
goto power on global health,” said the Connecticut Democrat.

The WHO declined to comment on the announcement. Officials of the U.N. agency have not
directly addressed a letter that Trump sent to the general director May 18, which warned
that he would make permanent a temporary freeze on U.S. funding and reconsider U.S.
membership unless it committed to “major substantive improvements within the next 30
days.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200530/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. President Donald Trump blasts China

Tennessee Republican Sen. Lamar Alexander, chairman of the Senate health committee,
also warned that the president’s decision could interfere with vaccine trials and interna-
tional cooperation during future outbreaks.

“Certainly there needs to be a good, hard look at mistakes the World Health Organization
might have made in connection with coronavirus, but the time to do that is after the crisis
has been dealt with, not in the middle of it,” said Alexander, echoing a point made by oth-
ers, including the head of the United Nations.

At a later event Friday, Trump was asked about relations with China and he repeated his
earlier suspicions about how the country managed to apparently contain the virus in
Wuhan while it spread to Europe and the United States.

“Well, we’re certainly not happy with what happened with respect to China,” he told re-
porters.

Tensions over Hong Kong have been increasing for more than a year as China has cracked
down on protesters and sought to exert more control over the former British territory.
Trump said the administration would begin eliminating the “full range” of agreements
that had given Hong Kong a relationship with the U.S. that mainland China lacked, includ-
ing exemptions from controls on certain exports. He said the State Department would be-
gin warning U.S. citizens of the threat of surveillance and arrest when visiting the city.
‘One system’

“China has replaced its promised formula of one country, two systems, with one country,
one system,” he said.

Secretary of State Mike Pompeo notified Congress on Wednesday that Hong Kong is no
longer deserving of the preferential trade and commercial status it has enjoyed from the
U.S. since it reverted to Chinese rule in 1997.

It’s not yet clear what impact the decision will have on U.S. companies that operate in
Hong Kong or on the city’s position as Asia’s major financial hub, or how China will react
to the decision.

Rep. Chris Smith, a New Jersey Republican who is a commissioner of the Congressional Ex-
ecutive Commission on China, praised the decision on Hong Kong as an overdue response
to the government of President Xi Jinping for human rights abuses, including against reli-
gious minorities in the Xinjiang region.

“After years of human rights admonishment and cheap rhetoric devoid of any meaningful
penalties, Xi has concluded that the West is all talk, no action,” Smith said. “President
Trump, however, is today beginning to change that and is doing what previous presidents
have failed to do.”

The president also said the U.S. would be suspending entry of Chinese graduate students
who are suspected of taking part in an extensive government campaign to acquire trade
knowledge and academic research for the country’s military and industrial development.
Allowing their continued entry to the country would be “detrimental to the interests of the
United States,” Trump said in an order released after the White House announcement.
Revocation of the visas has faced opposition from U.S. universities and scientific organiza-
tions that depend on tuition fees paid by Chinese students to offset other costs and fear
possible reciprocal action from Beijing.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200530/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. President Donald Trump blasts China

The order issued by the president included an exemption for students whose work was not
expected to benefit the Chinese military.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200530/page/1/textview 3/3
