2020. 6. 18. *Juneteenth is our journey'

‘Juneteenth is our journey’

State Black caucus focuses holiday narrative on fight for justice instead of
Trump

The Oklahoman - 13 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Carla Hinton Faith editor chinton@oklahoman.com

TULSA—A group of Black state legislators said nothing will stop them from placing the fo-
cus of this year's Juneteenth observance on matters like Medicaid expansion, voting by ab-
sentee ballot andre forming police departments.

a

 

Not even a nearby campaign rally planned by President Donald Trump will deter the Okla-
homa Legislative Black Caucus from spending time on June 19 addressing the injustices
that have crippled the communities they serve.

The caucus, | ed by Rep. Regina Goodwin, D-Tulsa, didn' t address Trump by name during
a 30- minute news conference on Friday outside the Greenwood Cultural Center ,322 N
Greenwood.

However, it was clear that the elected leaders wanted

to focus the Juneteenth narrative on righting the wrongs that hinder their constituents in-
stead of on the president's rally that is set to be held in Tulsa on the same day.

After the news conference, Rep. Jason Lowe said: “We're not focused on Trump, per se. We
are more focused on absentee voting. We're more focused on (State Question) 802, Medi-
caid expansion. We're focusing on people in rural Oklahoma. We' re in t he middle of a
pandemic, COVID-19.

“Those people need health care. I think it's a no brainer,” said Lowe, the Black Caucus' vice
chairman.

In her remarks, Goodwin seemed determined to keep the message of June teen th centered
on Black Oklahomans and their ancestors. June teen this a holiday on June 19 observed in
many Black communities around the country as a celebration of the end of slavery.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/2020061 3/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. *Juneteenth is our journey'

Her words came as she stood in front of the 1921 Black Wall Street Memorial. Goodwin rep-
resents House District 73, which encompasses the Greenwood District. Once the site of a
prosperous Black business community known as “Black Wall Street,” the area was burned
down in 1921 and hundreds of Black Oklahomans were killed by whites during what is
known as the Tulsa Race Massacre.

“Juneteenth is our journey. Juneteenth is our story,” she said.

Goodwin said by focusing on relevant issues, the Black Caucus and their constituents will
be honoring their ancestors. She spoke of people brought to America as slaves, and who,
when freed from the bonds of slavery, were forced to endure a constant stream of indigni-
ties including Jim Crow, lynchings, inferior schools and health care.

The focus for this year's observance will include calling out the racial injustice meted out
by police who are supposed to protect Black communities, she said. And she called out the
names of American Black men and women who have been killed by police, including Ter-
ence Crutcher of Tulsa, an unarmed Black man who was killed by Betty Shelby, then a
Tulsa policewoman. Shelby was acquitted of a crime in his death.

Goodwin said Blacks also continue to face disparities in health care and schools and there
are far too many Black men and women who are disproportionately incarcerated in Okla-
homa. She said caucus members will continue to encourage people in their communities to
fill out Census forms, vote in the June 30 statewide election to determine Medicaid expan-
sion, and make plans to vote consistently in the future.

“That's how we celebrate our ancestors,” she said.

“Juneteenth is no joke. We're not fully free until we have justice. We're going to continue
to be truth tellers and fighters for justice.”'

When a reporter told her that Gov. Kevin Stitt and Sen. Jim Inhofe said Trump's visit to Ok-
lahoma is an honor, the representative talked about honor.

“We're not going to dishonor the history of our ancestors. We're not going to be distracted
by the divisiveness of racism. Were not going to be distracted by the foolishness of double
talk,” Goodwin.

Others who attended the news conference included other members of the caucus: Rep. Ajay
Pittman, D-Oklahoma City; Sen. Kevin Matthews, D-Tulsa; and Sen. Monroe Nichols-D-
Tulsa; plus Alicia Andrews, chair of the Oklahoma Democratic Party, who is Black.

Earlier in the week, Andrews said Trump's plan to host a rally at the BOK Center in down-
town Tulsa near the site of the Tulsa Race Massacre on Juneteenth is a “deliberate insult.”
Lowe and Pitt man said members of the Black caucus have tried to introduce legislation
addressing police brutality and hate crimes but they didn't get a hearing. Lowe said he is
hopeful that they may get more cooperation from other legislators regarding those issues.
Pittman said there are a host of challenges facing Black Oklahomans.

“We are really in a pandemic inside a pandemic, which is racism,” she said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/2020061 3/page/1/textview 2/2
