2020. 6. 17. COVID19 testing offered to protesters

COVID19 testing offered to protesters
Location near AAC offering 2 days of subsidized swabs

The Dallas Morning News - 10 Jun 2020 - 1A: By NIC GARCIA Staff Writer nic.garcia@dallasnews.com

Protesters who have taken to the streets of Dallas and North Texas suburbs qualify for a
federally subsidized coronavirus test.

Protesters who have taken to the streets of Dallas and North Texas suburbs to rally against
police brutality and racism qualify for a federally subsidized coronavirus test.

A popup testing site near American Airlines Center is expected to open Wednesday for pro-
testers to walk up to get tested, a spokeswoman for Parkland Health & Hospital System
said.

Dallas County Judge Clay Jenkins has encouraged protesters to seek a

COVID19 test from one of the several public testing sites that are managed in part by Park-
land.

The county has classified protesters as having a high risk of exposure, which makes them
eligible for the tests provided to the county by the federal government, Parkland officials
said.

Parkland will tentatively shut down the drivethrough testing site at American Airlines
Center on Wednesday and Thursday afternoons to provide testing at a walkup site nearby,
which is expected to open at 2 p.m.

Because the county designated protesters as a highrisk group, any

person regardless of age, job or symptoms may be tested. A person who wants to be tested
must have a photo ID. He said the testing sites will not be sharing results with police or
other law enforcement agencies.

Among the earliest interventions to stop the spread of the fastmoving coronavirus was a
prohibition on large gatherings. The protests, which have attracted thousands of people to
downtown Dallas for nearly two weeks, run afoul of those orders. In statements and mes-
sages on social media, Jenkins has stressed that protesters follow physical distancing
standards and good hygiene practices.

Protesters are not heeding his advice. While many are wearing facial coverings and masks,
they’re cramming into narrow streets and parks downtown.

Parkland nurses help test individuals at two mega testing sites — one at AAC and the other
at Ellis Davis Field House. Two walkup sites also staffed by Parkland nurses recently
opened at Red Bird Mall and Inspired Vision Compassion Center.

The sites are comanaged by the city of Dallas, Dallas County, the state and federal govern-
ments. Protesters can receive a free test at any of these locations.

Changes to testing criteria and logistics are always subject to change based on the evolving
nature of the coronavirus. Parkland officials suggested that if the walkup site is popular,
they could expand its hours.

The two walkup testing sites in southern Dallas have hit the cap of 75 tests per day. Park-
land did not know how many tests would be on hand at the walkup site at AAC but said it

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 0/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. COVID19 testing offered to protesters

could be as many as 300 per day.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 0/page/1/textview

2/2
