2020. 6. 17. THE U.S. ECONOMY

THE U.S. ECONOMY
entered a recession in February, ending the longest expansion on record.

The Dallas Morning News - 9 Jun 2020 - 1A - By CHRISTOPHER RUGABER

WASHINGTON — The U.S. economy entered a recession in February as the coronavirus
struck the nation, a group of economists declared Monday, ending the longest expansion
on record.

The economists said that employment, income and spending peaked in February and then
fell sharply as the pandemic shut down businesses across the country, marking the start of
the downturn after nearly 11years of economic growth.

A committee within the National Bureau of Economic Research, a trade group, determines
when recessions begin and end. It broadly defines a recession as “a decline in economic
activity that lasts more than a few months.”

Financial markets had little reaction Monday to the NBER’S declaration. February is when
the stock market hit its record high before stumbling into a severe downturn from which it
has mostly recovered, thanks to extraordinary stimulus and support measures from the
Federal Reserve and Congress as well as expectations that the worst of the economic pain
may have passed.

The unemployment rate is officially 13.3%, down from 14.7% in April. Both figures are
higher than in any other downturn since World War II. A broader measure of underem-
ployment that includes those who have given up looking and those who have been reduced
to parttime status is 21.2%.

On Friday, the government said that employers added 2.5 million jobs in May, an unex-
pected gain that suggested job losses may have bottomed out. A recession ends when em-
ployment and output start to pick up again, not when they reach their prerecession levels.
So it’s possible that the recession could technically end soon.

That would make the current recession the shortest and deepest on record. It is expected to
be followed by an extended recovery before the economy manages to regain its prepan-
demic levels of production and employment. Some economists say it could take two years
or more, with the unemployment rate likely still 10% or higher at the end of this year.

On Monday, the World Bank said the world was facing a health and economic crisis that
has spread with astonishing speed and will produce the largest shock the global economy
has witnessed in seven decades. It expects millions of people to be pushed into extreme

poverty.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200609/page/1/textview 4/1
