2020. 6. 17. Police in schools: Md. county considers removing officers.

Police in schools: Md. county considers removing officers.

SECURITY TO SOME, THREAT TO OTHERS As protests rage, systems weigh
removing officers

The Washington Post - 13 Jun 2020 - A1 - BY DONNA ST. GEORGE AND PERRY STEIN

With a wave of protests turning the nation’s focus to racism and police violence, the
largest school system in Maryland is rethinking whether uniformed officers should be
based inside its public schools.

 

Street olooures Saturday and Sunday for preteats

Wehloular maficmayba restricted within thes: area fram appro rusts
Gam. midnight Saturcky, ara thoustrests willbe closed from
approx inatety4 am. i midnight Sunday.

 

 

 

a »

Sewrce OC pate Tein meer PT

Officials in Montgomery County, in the suburbs of Washington, decided this week to doa
detailed analysis of arrest data and the use of school-assigned police, called school re-
source officers (SROS), in the 166,000-student system.

Under a measure passed unanimously Thursday, the school board will decide in January
whether to modify or scrap the program, following an interim report due in the fall anda
recommendation from Superintendent Jack R. Smith.

The school system, which has 208 schools, employs a security staff of 224, while the
county and municipalities provide SROS for its 25 high schools.

“We'll pursue this vigorously and come back with lots of information,” Smith told the
board.

Across the Washington region, the role of police has been reconsidered and debated, as the
country has convulsed with anger and pain over the killing of George Floyd, a black man, in
police custody as he lay handcuffed on the ground in Minneapolis.

A police presence in schools has often been a flash point. Some see law enforcement offi-
cers as an important layer of safety on campus, while others say students’ missteps are too
often criminalized by police — and that students of color are over-arrested.

In Maryland’s Prince George’s County — with the largest blackmajority school system in
the country — the issue was debated for much of the week. Petitions circulated online.
Opinions flared on social media.

Two school board members drew up proposals that would have ended the use of SROS. On
Monday, a three-member majority on a Prince George’s school board committee voted to
cancel its contracts for SROS and designate up to $5 million for addition

al mental health professionals and counselors and other supports.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200613/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Police in schools: Md. county considers removing officers.

But three days later, the full Prince George’s school board blocked the conversation alto-
gether — tabling the issue until mid-september.

“T’m just shocked that we couldn’t even have a debate on the matter,” said school board
member Raaheela Ahmed. “It’s our responsibility to have discussions on issues that affect
our students.”

Board member David Murray said stifling the issue after weeks of public demonstrations
was “shameful.”

“The whole point of protesting and marching is to compel your elected officials to take ac-
tion and do something,” he said.

Prince George’s has 33 SROS, along with 215 security staff members, 70 of whom have ar-
rest powers, a spokeswoman said. Only the SROS were at issue.

Several school board members said more community feedback was needed.

“The issue was tabled because the board felt that additional consideration of the issue was
required and additional input from the community was necessary in order to make an in-
formed decision,” Board Chairman Alvin Thornton said.

Asked why discussion was not permitted, Thornton said a conversation was already started
in Prince George’s. “There’s a rich discussion in our community,” he said.

In Montgomery, student board member Nate Tinbite, a co-sponsor of the measure the
board passed, said the toll on students of color is too much. “The time to end the criminal-
ization of our children is now,” he said. As a black male, he said, he understands the expe-
rience personally.

“It’s hard to function understanding and knowing that a target is on your back — when
you’re outside, when you’re in grocery stores, when you’re in malls and on the street, be-
cause of a societal impression of people of color,” he said.

The measure Montgomery passed requires the superintendent to come back with data on
student arrests and report on the agreement that guides how police operate on campus. It
also requires an examination of approaches used by similarly situated school systems that
do not base SROS in school buildings. Comments will be sought from administrators, staff
and others in the community, officials said.

School board member Patricia O’neill said the public clamors for more police in schools af-
ter tragedies such as Columbine and Sandy Hook but it’s not the role of SROS to stand as
armed guards; they are brought into schools under a model of community policing.

“Many of them are fine individuals; many of them have good relationships with students
in their buildings. But just as in any field, some of them probably should not be working
with teenagers,” she said. “I think it is worthwhile to examine how things are going, look
at our data, because disproportionately, whether it’s local school discipline or arrests, I
suspect it skews to more African American and Latino students.”

Early this year, county lawmakers and advocates in Montgomery debated the broader issue
of the police presence in schools, after Council member Craig Rice (DDistrict 2) and County
Executive Marc Elrich (D) proposed expanding the SRO program — and were met witha
swift public backlash.

This week, Elrich said in an interview he “was never a big fan of the SROS. I argued more
than once that we should put counselors in school rather than using police.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200613/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Police in schools: Md. county considers removing officers.

In both Montgomery and

Prince George’s, SROS are paid for with county or municipal funds, not school system
money.

In the District, the school system has a contract of more than $23 million with the city’s
police department. That contract pays for more than 300 unarmed security guards.
Separately, the school system employs 17 armed officers who have police powers, includ-
ing the authority to arrest. The D.C. police budget also allocates 98 school resource officers
who move among the city’s more than 200 public charter and traditional public school
campuses.

Council member David Grosso (I-AT Large), who co-chairs the education committee, said
he is considering introducing legislation that would divert money from the police contract
and require the school system to use those funds on mental health services or other vio-
lence prevention strategies.

But Chancellor Lewis D. Ferebee says it’s not that simple: School leaders ask him for more
security, not less, he said, and SROS often build strong relationships with students. He said
they are also critical to a school program that ensures students can safely commute to and
from school.

Still, the push to remove police officers from schools is gaining traction among residents.
Black Swan Academy — an afterschool program that says it empowers students to become
activists in their communities — has collected more than 1,500 signatures on a petition
calling on city leaders to remove school resource officers from schools and invest more
money in mental health and violence prevention services. The group also believes that the
police department should not hold the contract placing security guards in schools. Instead,
the group says, school leaders should decide who works on campuses.

“School is supposed to be a safe environment for us, yet it is a system ran like it holds
criminals,” Myah Davis, a 15-year-old Eastern High student involved in the Black Swan
Academy, said in a video calling for D.C. to amend its school police policies. “I believe this
should change.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200613/page/1/textview 3/3
