2020. 6. 17. Surviving is just the start

Surviving is just the start

Their bodies racked by covid-19, many patients face a difficult rehab
process

The Washington Post - 10 Jun 2020 - A1 . BY LENNY BERNSTEIN

Hugo Sosa arrived here a hero, triumphant over the worst that covid-19 can inflict on the
human body. Nearly 100 of his fellow first responders had whooped and cheered as Sosa
was wheeled out of a hospital last month. They chanted his name. He flashed them a

thumbs-up from his gurney.

 
    

Twelve days later, frail and drawn in his room at Burke Rehabilitation Hospital, Sosa puz-
zled over a pile of coins his speech pathologist had set before him.

“Forty-five cents from a dollar, what do you get back?” Kristen Lucke asked.

“Fifty-five cents,” Sosa responded quickly.

“Good, show me 55 cents.” That was more difficult. Sosa would have to hold the number in
his head while he searched for the right coins. Today that was too much to ask. Perhaps to-
morrow.

For the fortunate covid-19 patients like Sosa who survive intensive care and long stretches
on ventilators, the journey home can be an arduous and lonely one that

runs through places like Burke. Their survival is testament to the lifesaving value of some
of the world’s most sophisticated medical interventions, but their deficits reveal the toll of
the disease and of hospitalization itself. Their futures can depend on what happens here.
“A lot of the time, it’s a win to get discharged from the hospital,” Lucke said. “Everyone
forgets there are so many things that go on before you actually make it home, if you can

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200610/page/1/textview 115
2020. 6. 17. Surviving is just the start

make it home.”

The sheer size of the coronavirus pandemic means that thousands of people may need this
kind of therapy. Their numbers already are forcing change on a U.S. medical system that
did not see the coronavirus coming.

Two weeks ago, when The Washington Post visited Sosa at Burke, 39 of its 156 beds were
occupied by covid-19 patients. An additional 146 people, former covid-19 patients and
others, were waiting to get in. At the peak in April, Burke housed 90 people infected by the
virus, including acute care patients who had nowhere else to go.

Now the hospital is back to focusing on survivors, accepting them even if they are still pos-
itive for the coronavirus.

Another New York hospital system, Northwell Health, has opened two small units where
patients will be weaned off ventilators outside the ICU and begin physical therapy before
they are ready to move to traditional rehabilitation centers.

Sosa, 53, a captain of the dispatch team that sends first responders to emergencies in the
Bronx and Manhattan, lost his sense of smell March 26, a telltale sign of covid-19. By April
1, he was hospitalized.

He spent 44 days in the intensive care unit at White Plains Hospital, 19 of them on a venti-
lator. The virus invaded his lungs, injured his kidneys, inflamed his liver, and left him with
deep skin wounds on his face and buttocks. His wound nurse is not sure those are bedsores;
it’s possible they are caused by covid-19’s attack on blood vessels. He also developed me-
thicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), a common, severe hospital-acquired
infection.

Once a lineman for the fire department football team, Sosa lost 32 pounds as his body
worked overtime to clear the virus. The nutrition funneled through his feeding tube could
not keep up.

When his lungs healed, his sedation ended and his ventilator tube was removed, doctors
couldn’t wake him for days. A CT scan showed that the disease had allowed large blood
clots to travel to both sides of his brain, a “bilateral stroke” in medical terminology. Much
of his working memory, which allowed him to do things like organize coins, was badly
damaged. His dominant right hand was more severely affected, but his left was weakened
as well. He could not walk, stand or get out of bed on his own.

“All the terrible things that could go wrong with covid, he had them all,” said his wife,
Blanca Delgado-sosa, an EMT in New York City.

While Sosa was hospitalized, his entire family developed the disease. His twin 13-year-old
children had mild cases. His wife contracted a more severe version, with painful symp-
toms, but was not hospitalized. His 85-year-old mother-in-law, who lived with the fam-
ily, quickly died in the same hospital where Sosa was being treated.

The family, worried about the impact on Sosa’s rehabilitation, did not tell him about her
death until June 1. The two were very close, devout New York Yankees fans in a sports-mad
Yonkers home. Sosa blames himself for his mother-in-law’s death, his wife said.

Since entering the Burke rehab facility May 15, Sosa has come so far, so fast that doctors
are unwilling to predict the limits of his progress. Therapists have retaught him how to
swallow, use a knife and fork, and comb his hair. His physical endurance, near zero when

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200610/page/1/textview 2/5
2020. 6. 17. Surviving is just the start

he arrived, has improved dramatically. He can walk 30 feet with a walker and on June 1 took
his first steps without any assistance. With each passing day, he requires less oxygen
through the cannula in his nose.

“Before I came to Burke, I was bed-bound,” Sosa recalled. “Now I can stand up. Now! can
brush my teeth. Now I can take a shower. . . . It sounds like baby steps. but it was a tremen-
dous step. What we take for granted is bathing ourselves, brushing our teeth, shaving.”
Less clear is how his brain will rebound from the twin attacks of stroke and oxygen depri-
vation. “My husband is used to doing drug calculations [for emergency patients] in his
brain,” said Delgado-sosa. “He was like a whiz with doing that. That was something he
would brag about.” As a captain and supervisor, Sosa had to track where paramedics,
EMTS and firetrucks were located and where they needed to go.

“T don’t know what capacity he’s coming home in,” DelgadoSosa said. No date has been set
for her husband’s release.

Debate over ventilators

When covid-19 patients began pouring into New York hospitals with frighteningly low lev-
els of oxygen in their blood, front-line caregivers turned to what they knew. First, they
sent oxygen from tanks into patients’ lungs via nasal tubes. Patients who did not respond
were sent to the ICU, sedated and placed on mechanical ventilators, which, in effect,
breathe for them.

A drastic shortage of the devices made them an enduring symbol of the crisis, perhaps as
much as the specialized masks that health-care workers also lacked. New York Gov. An-
drew M. Cuomo (D) said city hospitals would need 30,000 ventilators, and he and President
Trump sparred publicly over whether that estimate was too high.

Then, physicians began to notice that the lungs of some covid19 patients responded differ-
ently than the lungs of typical patients suffering from acute respiratory distress syndrome.
Speculating that ventilation was being overused in the pandemic, they began to use the
machines more sparingly. They also adopted other, less invasive methods, such as turning
patients on their stomachs to help them breathe more easily. The debate over ventilation
persists in the medical community.

There is also research evidence that pure oxygen can be corrosive to lungs and other tissue.
The air we breathe is only about 20 percent oxygen. And lying in an ICU, unconscious and
paralyzed by powerful drugs, is harmful in itself.

Nevertheless, there is widespread agreement that many more people would die of covid-19
without intensive care, ventilation and clinicians familiar with both.

There is no good data on how many people have been placed on ventilators during the pan-
demic. Studies on the number who survive vary widely. Early reports out of China and else-
where suggested a mortality rate of about 90 percent, and some U.S. studies put it at about
80 percent.

But more recently, doctors who work extensively with covid-19 patients on ventilators
have said 50 percent to 80 percent recover.

‘I’m alive. I can’t believe it.’

Jacqueline Stewart, a 56-yearold psychiatric nurse, spent four weeks on a ventilator before
she was discharged to Burke for rehab. She arrived “deconditioned,” essentially unable to

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200610/page/1/textview 3/5
2020. 6. 17. Surviving is just the start

move on her own, with nerve damage in her right arm, probably from her position in the
ICU bed. She has a raspy voice from a paralyzed vocal cord and what she calls her “battle
scars” — marks on her neck from an intravenous line and a tracheotomy. She vowed never
to cover them with makeup.

After weeks of physical therapy, Stewart went home May 29. There are 20 steps up to her
front door in Yonkers. Burke would not allow her to leave until she proved she could climb
20 steps in the hospital.

“T’m alive, so everything else is gravy,” Stewart said. “Everything else is a bonus. I’m
alive. I can’t believe it.”

Some patients will never recover their full strength, so Burke teaches them ways to man-
age their exertion. They can dress and shower sitting down, arrange their kitchens to min-
imize standing, and group their tasks to reduce the number of times they go up and down
stairs, said Matthew N. Bartels, chairman of rehabilitation medicine for the Montefiore
health system, of which Burke is a part. Quality of life can be largely maintained, he said.
“T tell [them]: ‘You’ve seen the Energizer Bunny? You’re the oth

er guy,’ ” he said.

Almost no one arrives at Burke with just a single problem. Like Sosa, most patients have
underlying medical conditions, such as diabetes or heart disease, that leave them more
vulnerable to the coronavirus and complicate their rehabilitation.

“They bring all these co-morbidities with them,” said Mooyeon Oh-park, Burke’s chief
medical officer. “They bring that complexity here.”

Janet Wiedhopf, 78, was also discharged, but not to her home. On Friday, she moved to a
longerterm rehabilitation facility, a stop on the way home, where she had lived indepen-
dently before covid19. For five days, she was intubated aboard the USS Comfort, which
docked off Manhattan in April. She arrived at Burke still positive for the coronavirus,
though doctors aren’t sure the test result was accurate.

Wiedhopf has high blood pressure that affects the arteries in her lungs and heart. It is dif-
ficult to predict the course of her recovery. “We just don’t know what the trajectory is,”
said her doctor, Justin Hill, director of the brain injury rehabilitation program at Burke.
“We just don’t know. The disease has only been around five months.”

‘Hugo is a survivor’

Sosa’s parents immigrated to New York from Ecuador. He was born and raised in Manhat-
tan. He and Delgado-sosa started at the academy on the same day in 1991, then worked
their way up the ranks of New York City’s EMS. When the World Trade Center was attacked
on Sept. 11, 2001, Sosa triaged casualties a block from the North Tower, then ran for his life
when it fell.

“Hugo is a survivor,” his wife said.

Sosa met Cesar Escobar early in his 29-year career. They became partners, racing to emer-
gencies in the Bronx. An Ecuadoran and a Colombian, the two joke that they should not get
along, Escobar said, but they have become close friends. Their families have vacationed to-
gether.

Sosa “is like the mayor of EMS,” Escobar said. “Everybody knows him. Everybody is his
best friend. If there’s an event, a sports event, a gathering, a retirement, he and Blanca are

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200610/page/1/textview 4/5
2020. 6. 17. Surviving is just the start

there.”

The crowd at White Plains Hospital when Sosa was released gathered by word of mouth, he
said. Everyone wanted to be there for Sosa.

At Burke, a 60-acre campus with wide green lawns, there are no crowds. Visitors are still
banned from New York hospitals. A physical-therapy session two weeks ago was con-
ducted in Sosa’s cramped room, because patients are still housed in the therapy rooms.
Sosa stood with the aid of a walker, as physical therapist Domenic Facciola closely moni-
tored his heart rate and blood pressure.

Sosa has been taught to take deep breaths to steady both after the exertion of rising to his
feet.

Eight days earlier, “he was only able to stand for 10 seconds,” Facciola said. “Now he’s up
to two minutes. This is phenomenal in the PT world after covid.”

Slowly, Sosa traversed six feet of floor space four times, relearning the basics of mobility,
one step at a time.

“Domenic is teaching me to walk again,” Sosa said. “It’s a reset. It’s a true reset of learn-
ing, of getting your strength back. The hospital kept me alive. Burke is putting me back to-
gether.”

Only through thousands of repetitions will Sosa’s physical and mental skills return, Oh-
park said. But his caregivers are pleased with the pace of his improvement. Sosa is “really
making major gains here in rehab,” said Andrew Abdou, his physician. “We’re really ex-
cited about how far he’s going to go.”

Sosa wants to go back to his family, to play golf again and to get back to the dispatch cen-
ter.

“T love to work. I’m a workaholic,” he said. “I want to get back into it. If I get a full recov-
ery, that’s the first thing I want to do is go through those doors and say, ‘Here, guys, I’m
back.’ ”

Delgado-sosa wants her husband to retire, to take his pension and enjoy life outside the
EMS.

“He survived 9/11. He survived this,” she said. “We don’t know how much more time we
have.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200610/page/1/textview 5/5
