2020. 6. 17. Amid tension, U.S. poised to take financial fight to China

Amid tension, U.S. poised to take financial fight to China

The Washington Post : 29 May 2020 - A1 : BY GERRY SHIH

Through three years of economic conflict, the United States and China have erected tariffs
that squeezed trade. They have clashed over the telecommunications firm Huawei and the

flow of strategic semiconductor technology.
t | a | LI} q | ;
* t a i

iD Phase | ss a

   

 

Now, as tensions between the two powers flare over the coronavirus pandemic and the fate
of Hong Kong, prospects are rising that the trade and technology war could expand into a
volatile new front: finance.

The dimensions of the conflict broadened this month when President Trump moved to
prevent a federal retirement fund from investing billions of dollars in shares of Chinese
companies. Days later, the Senate unanimously passed a bill that would require Chinese
firms listed on U.S. stock exchanges to provide transparency about their finances and own-
ership to auditors. The measure, if signed into law, could force scores of Chinese firms to
delist from the New York Stock Exchange and the Nasdaq.

This week, the stakes ratcheted dramatically higher after U.S. law

makers proposed putting sanctions on China’s banks if the ruling Communist Party were
to move ahead with legislation that would undermine Hong Kong’s autonomy. The Trump
administration is expected to respond to China’s passage of a Hong Kong national security
law — perhaps by revoking U.S. trade privileges — but it’s not clear if that will take the
form of financial sanctions.

After squeezing the flow of trade, technology and visas, U.S. moves to choke off capital
could present the biggest challenge of all for a Chinese economy that, despite its size, re-
mains highly dependent on an international financial system dominated by the United
States. And in China, an increasingly urgent debate is unfolding about whether — and how
— the country could weather that pressure.

In recent months, former finance minister Lou Jiwei and prominent Chinese advisers have
warned about the inevitability of Washington escalating its tactics from tariffs and tech-
nology restrictions to all-out “financial war.”

Domestic commentary has reached deafening levels, calling on Chinese companies to pre-
pare to be denied international financing and for China to hasten the development of a new
digital currency and alternate global payment system with friendly states such as Russia,
Iran and Venezuela that would operate beyond the reach of U.S. sanctions.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200529/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. Amid tension, U.S. poised to take financial fight to China

Hawkish Chinese commentators have revived the perennial threat that China could sell off
its $1.1 trillion hoard of U.S. Treasurys, which would roil the U.S. and Chinese economies
alike.

“It’s really unfortunate to see the U.S. start warring again not only on technology but on
investment,” said Wang Huiyao, president of the Center for China and Globalization think
tank in Beijing and an adviser to the Chinese cabinet. “Okay, the U.S. has advantages with
its financial system. But that’s not going to last forever. It could be shortterm. It’ll only
force China to accelerate developing its own system.”

The Chinese concerns are existential. They extend beyond the likelihood that its U.s.-listed
companies — totaling more than 150 and worth more than $1.2 trillion in 2019, according
to a congressional report — may be withdrawn from the New York Stock Exchange and the
Nasdaq composite index. In an extreme case, the thinking goes, U.S. restrictions on invest-
ment would curb the Chinese economy’s access to dollars, which it increasingly needs to
pay off debt and buy everything from foreign companies and computer chips to oil and
grain. Although China maintains $3.1 trillion in foreignexchange reserves — the world’s
largest — that war chest has plummeted by 25 percent since 2014 as the government has
tried to prop up the yuan while the economy slows and Chinese firms and families whisk
their assets abroad.

Rising aggression from the United States is only reinforcing Beijing’s determination to
carve out space for itself beyond the reach of U.S. financial power, Wang said.

China’s years-long ambition of internationalizing the yuan has progressed slowly, with
only 2 percent of all global transactions conducted in the Chinese currency. But after Presi-
dent Xi Jinping designated blockchain one of the country’s top innovation priorities in
November, China pushed ahead last month with trials of its new digital currency in several
cities, the early tentative steps that could one day lead to freedom from relying on the dol-
lar for international transactions.

“The U.S. may gain a temporary advantage, but they will drive division in the world,”
Wang said. “They might regret it.”

For now, the primacy of the dollar and the pivotal role of the U.S. banking system mean
China’s banks could be instantly hobbled in the event of U.S. sanctions. That seemed al-
most unthinkable a few years ago, but in introducing the Hong Kong Autonomy Act this
week, Sen. Patrick J. Toomey (R-PA.), a member of the Banking Committee, explicitly said
he crafted legislation that holds leverage over Chinese banks and hence Beijing.

“When business and financial interests realize that this is a tool that can be deployed, I
think there’s going to be a whole new level of pressure on the government” to refrain from
undermining Hong Kong’s autonomy, Toomey told reporters.

The Chinese economy “for the foreseeable future will be dependent on U.S. dollar transac-
tions,” Toomey said. “So I think these sanctions we’ve proposed are likely to be very, very
powerful for a very long time.”

U.S. weighs response

For now, it’s not clear how far the Trump administration would be willing to go to restrict
investment from China or whether it would be feasible. U.S. financial regulators have wor-
ried for years that Chinese companies were trading in the United States while flouting dis-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200529/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. Amid tension, U.S. poised to take financial fight to China

closure requirements, citing Chinese national security laws that demand corporate se-
crecy.

But in an interview with Fox Business this month, Trump expressed hesitation about forc-
ing these Chinese companies off U.S. exchanges en masse because they might list instead
in London or Hong Kong — a “Plan B” that has already been voiced by prominent Chinese
executives such as Robin Li, who heads the Internet search company Baidu.

Still, observers say new measures could hurtle unpredictably forward at a time when the
attitude toward China is almost universally hostile in Washington.

Just eight months ago, plans to restrict pension investments and delist Chinese companies
that do not meet audit requirements were aired by administration officials but quickly fiz-
zled. This month, both proposals moved ahead, with the financial auditing bill sponsored
by John Neely Kennedy (R-LA.) sailing through the Senate with almost no discussion.
Trump “loves tariffs to death, but on things that would have an impact on financial mar-
kets, he doesn’t always like that,” said a former White House economics official, speaking
on the condition of anonymity to discuss the president. “But it’s clear there will be more
proposals to further weaken financial ties, and in the post-coronavirus climate, things can
happen very quickly. It’s almost scary.”

China hawks in Washington, including Sen. Marco Rubio (RFla.), have pressured market
indexes, against which trillions of dollars in passive investments are benchmarked, to ex-
clude Chinese companies, particularly makers of surveillance or defense equipment. Oth-
ers want to go further, to use Securities and Exchange Commission regulations to discour-
age institutional investors from buying up shares of an economic rival.

In a statement, Rubio said he would “continue to work with my colleagues in a bipartisan
fashion to address this issue and ensure that the Chinese Communist Party cannot exploit
U.S. capital markets” to undermine the United States.

“There’s a push from the hawks right now to ban pensions, 401(k)s and insurance compa-
nies from Chinese equities,” said Stephen K. Bannon, the former White House chief strate-
gist whose political group, the Committee on the Present Danger: China, seeks broad eco-
nomic decoupling from China. Delisting Chinese companies from U.S. exchanges, Bannon
said, “is just step one.”

Controlling the future

As talk mounted in Washington this week about potential U.S. measures against China, the
Communist Party-run Global Times newspaper published stories warning that financial
war would be calamitous for the world.

“If Trump takes on China in the financial field, he would roil the global markets as sucha
war would certainly go beyond Chinese and U.S. markets,” an editorial said Wednesday.
“No developed countries could shelter their open financial systems from the shocks. The
Trump administration needs to think about consequences before taking any reckless
moves, because no one knows how fast market risks could spread and what crisis they may
cause.”

Wang Wen, director of the Chongyang Institute for Financial Studies in Beijing and adviser
to several ministries, said he believes the Trump administration won’t carry out progres-
sively more extreme measures, such as outright banning pension investments in Chinese

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200529/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. Amid tension, U.S. poised to take financial fight to China

stocks, because of the “deep power” of an abiding force in the United States: Wall Street’s
thirst for returns.

“D.C. hawks want to prevent private capital from investing in China, but it’s foolish for
them to suppress American profits,” Wang said, noting that China in fact lowered
decades-long barriers on foreign capital this year in response to U.S. investor demands.
“The profit-seeking nature of capital determines that China is still one of the most
sought-after markets,” he said. “Whoever loses the Chinese market will lose the future.”
In recent days, China’s Internet, which is often filled with lively financial commentary, has
burst into heated discussion about the implications of a financial struggle against the
United States. Some commentators urged businesses to prepare for hardship. Others asked
Chinese mom-and-pop investors to plow their savings into the domestic stock market to
help the development of the motherland.

Most respected voices were more measured — but anxious.

“If the United States initiates a financial war ... we have to clearly recognize we don’t have
the advantage and take all precautions,” wrote Ren Zeping, an influential economist at the
Evergrande property conglomerate. “It’s now necessary to elevate the financial war to the
strategic heights of national security.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200529/page/1/textview 4/4
