2020. 6. 18. ‘Sharing the same soil’

‘Sharing the same soil’
Hundreds protest in Stillwater

The Oklahoman « 4 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Ellie Melero Staff writer emelero@oklahoman.com

STILLWATER — Hundreds of people gathered outside the Stillwater police station Wed-
nesday in 90- degree weather to protest George Floyd's death at the hands of a former
Minnesota police officer.

 

Ove WW ac:
The peaceful protest drew people from other cities, including Tulsa and Oklahoma City, to
listen to more than a dozen speakers talk about police brutality, white supremacy and sys-
tematic racism. Among the speakers were the Rev. T. Sheri Dickerson, the president of the
Oklahoma City chapter of Black Lives Matter; Still water Police Chief Jeff Watts and high
schooler Emily Croft, who organized the protest.
“We need to do something that the curators of institutional and systemic racism would
never expect,” Croft told the crowd. “That is to come together, all of us, as brothers and
sisters sharing the same soil.”
The speakers' messages varied as some focused on police killing sand others spoke about
white Christianity’ s promotion of racism, but t heir goals remained the same: to motivate
people to take action against an unjust system that targets black people.
Uriah Davis, a graduate student at Oklahoma State University's School of Global Studies,
spoke to the crowd
about the importance of being involved in activism even when it's not trending on Twitter.
“T can't trust you,” Davis said. “I'm sorry. I really want to, but the definition of insanity is
watching things happen and hoping and ... doing things over and over again and thinking
they're gonna change.”
Many of the protest ors responded enthusiastically to the speakers' messages, applauding
and cheering as each one made their messages heard.
Many said they were pleased with the turnout.
“T think all of us know that there's more people than what we think who do know what's
going on,” protestor Justiss Hines said. “It's not just us. We know that there are people

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/20200604/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. ‘Sharing the same soil’

standing with us and fighting with us, and it's heartwarming.”

One of t he more prominent protest attendees was OS U Police Chief Leon Jones, OSUPD's
first African American chief of police. Jones said he was at the protest in uniform to show
people that he supports their cause.

Jones was not the only uniformed officer to show his support for the protests.

Still water Police Department's Watts said he supports the peaceful protests across the
country and said agrees with those who are calling for officers who don't see a problem
with the

current system to turn in their badges. He said he was glad the Stillwater protest stayed
peaceful and believes it was effective at getting the message across.

“Nobody was here to cause violence or completely blame the police,” Watts said. “Their
frustrations are aimed at society in general. ... We will not tolerate mistreatment of any-
body.”

After about t wo and half hours in the hot sun, with only a short break to drink water

and eat tacos provided by the Stillwater Del Taco, the protestors left the police station.
Many wanted to make sure people know they support the George Floyd protests, that
they're in this fight together.

“Even though I'm not African American, I'm a Latina, and as a minority I know there's a
struggle and there's racism in our system,” Casandra Salinas said .“So I just wanted to be
out here and support my friends, my community.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/20200604/page/1/textview

2/2
