2020. 6. 17. A solemn, solitary Memorial Day

A solemn, solitary Memorial Day
President visits sites closed to the public during pandemic

The Dallas Morning News - 26 May 2020 - 1A - FROM WIRE REPORTS

Memorial Day events took on a new form Monday as Americans honored fallen soldiers

 

Even the ceremony at Arlington National Cemetery was altered. Presidents on Memorial
Day typically lay a wreath and speak at the hallowed burial ground in Virginia. But this
year, President Donald Trump gave no remarks. He approached a wreath already in place,
touched it and saluted.

President Donald Trump and first lady Melania Trump paid tribute to fallen soldiers on
Memorial Day by participating in a wreathlaying ceremony at the Tomb of the Unknown
Soldier at Arlington National Cemetery, which has been closed to the public for months
during the coronavirus pandemic.

At about 10:30 a.m. Monday, the president entered the grounds at the cemetery, saluting as
a military band played “The Starspangled Banner.” Afterward, Trump walked up to the
wreath that lay at the tomb, touching it before returning to stand alongside Vice President
Donald Pence and Defense Secretary Mark Esper.

Trump saluted again as a trumpeter played taps, which was followed by a moment of si-
lence. The president gave no public remarks.

Only family members with valid passes to the cemetery and staff were permitted on the
grounds this Memorial Day weekend. Since April, visitors and staff have been required to
wear masks at Arlington National Cemetery if they cannot maintain the proper 6 feet of
social distancing. Nobody is allowed onto the grounds without first showing that they are
carrying a mask.

Trump, the first lady, Pence and Esper did not wear masks. Many members of the military

and others also did not wear masks.
https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200526/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. A solemn, solitary Memorial Day

White House coronavirus coordinator Dr. Deborah Birx said Sunday that she is “very con-
cerned” about people neglecting to maintain a safe, 6foot distance. Even before the busy
Memorial Day weekend, some experts were warning of a second wave of coronavirus cases
across the Midwest and South.

Anew study estimates the virus, which has infected at least 1.6 million people in the United
States, may still be spreading at epidemic rates in 24 states.

Later in the day, Trump delivered Memorial Day remarks at Baltimore’s historic Fort
Mchenry.

“Together we will vanquish the virus and America will rise from this crisis to new and even
greater heights,” Trump said at the ceremony. “No obstacle, no challenge and no threat is
a match for the sheer determination of the American people.”

Baltimore Mayor Bernard “Jack” Young objected to Trump’s visit, saying it sends the
wrong message about stayathome directives and that the city cannot afford the added cost
of hosting him when it is losing $20 million a month because of the pandemic.

Trump noted that tens of thousands of service members and national guard personnel are
currently “on the front lines of our war against this terrible virus.”

The U.S. leads the world with more than 1.6 million confirmed coronavirus cases and more
than 97,000 deaths, according to a tally by Johns Hopkins University.

Trump said brave warriors from the nation’s past have shown that “in America, we are the
captains of our own fate.”

The Fort Mchenry National Monument and Historic Shrine is where a poem, written after a
huge American flag was hoisted to celebrate an important victory over the British during
the War of 1812, became “The Starspangled Banner.” The fort is closed to the public be-
cause of the pandemic.

Baltimore and the Washington area have the nation’s highest percentages of positive
cases, according to Birx.

The White House was unmoved by the mayor’s request to stay away.

“The brave men and women who have preserved our freedoms for generations did not stay
home and the president will not either as he honors their sacrifice by visiting such a his-
toric landmark in our nation’s history,” White House spokesman Judd Deere said in an
emailed statement Sunday.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200526/page/1/textview 2/2
