2020. 6. 17. Suspect in trail incident

Suspect in trail incident
Viral video shows cyclist approaching teens who were hanging fliers

The Washington Post : 6 Jun 2020 - A1 : BY DAN MORSE AND DANA HEDGPETH

Authorities probed the possible assault of teens who had posted fliers against police bru-
tality.

A 60-year-old Maryland man was arrested on three counts of misdemeanor assault Friday
night amid allegations he attacked three people who were trying to post anti-police bru-
tality fliers along a bicycle trail in Bethesda.

Anthony B. Brennan, of Kensington, came across the trio — ages 18, 19 and 19 — while
riding his bike Monday along the Capital Crescent Trail just before 1 p.m., authorities said.
One of the three recorded part of the ensuing encounter, which exploded across the Inter-
net on Thursday as social media users spent two days trying to learn the man’s identity.
Two men, including a retired police officer, were publicly named by Twitter users as the
assailant — even though authorities would later say they had nothing to do with the inci-
dent.

It was not until after 9 p.m. Friday that police announced the arrest of Brennan, shortly af-
ter he turned himself in at the Montgomery County Detention Center in Rockville. Based on
the nature of the charges, he was expected to be released from custody on little or no bond.
The three victims, police said, were walking along the trail near the Dalecarlia Tunnel, just
beyond the Washington, D.C., border.

‘(A man was lynched by the police. What are you going to do about it?” the fliers said, ac-
cording to Maryland-national Capital Park Police.

The cyclist, Park Police said, “began to argue about the flyers and forcibly grabbed the fly-
ers from one of the victims. Before leaving the scene, the suspect pushed his bicycle to-
wards the

male victim and caused him to fall to the ground.”

On Tuesday, police released photos of the cyclist. One of the victims also released video he
took.

Investigators contacted Brennan on Friday and received permission to search his home,
police said. Evidence linking him to the crime, authorities said, was found inside.

“T am grateful for the support of the community in this unfortunate incident,” said Darryl
McSwain, chief of the Montgomery County division of the Park Police.

Brennan’s attorneys Andrew Jezic and David Moyse said their client “recognizes that his
outrageous behavior toward the young adult victims on the Crescent Trail was unaccept-
able and wrong” and the “outrage felt in our community and across our country is com-
pletely justified.”

“T am sick with remorse for the pain and fear I caused the victims on the trail, and online,”
Brennan said in a statement through his lawyers. “I am cooperating fully with authorities.
Iam committed to making amends by addressing, through counseling, the underlying is-
sues that led to my abhorrent behavior.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200606/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Suspect in trail incident

The incident comes as mass demonstrations have filled the streets of American cities in an
outcry over the death of George Floyd.

The 18-year-old who recorded the video provided a copy to The Washington Post. He dis-
cussed what happened on the condition of anonymity because of fears for his safety.

The teenager said that in the last few weeks, he distributed

about 500 fliers in his neighborhood and upper Northwest Washington around Friendship
Heights, Tenleytown and Spring Valley.

He said he and his friends were headed toward Georgetown when the cyclist, also headed
in that direction, passed them while holding his cellphone.

“That’s them there,” the man said, according to the 18-year-old. The teen said the man
appeared to be recording them.

At the time, the teen said, he and his friends were putting one of their fliers on a telephone
pole about eight feet from the path. The cyclist asked the teen if he could see the posters.
“T thought he was intrigued, and I was ready to have a conversation with him of what he
could do to help,” the young man said. “As soon as I put out my hand to show him the
poster, he aggressively ripped it out of my hand.”

The man then approached the two women.

That’s when the 18-year-old took out his phone, he said, and started recording. The cyclist
got “in the face” of one of the women before he approached the other and “rips tape out of
her hands.”

He said the tape was being used to hang the fliers.

The cyclist then grabbed his bike, ran it toward the teen and “tried to pin me into the
ground with his bike,” the young man said.

He said he fell to the ground and stopped recording.

According to the 18-year-old, the cyclist got back on his bike, circled around the three and
started yelling profanities.

“You guys are awful,” he allegedly yelled. “You’ll never amount to anything.”

He also said, according to the teen, that “we’re inciting riots.” The teen said his leg was cut
by the bike and that the man pushed him over and “held his bike to me.”

The teen said he didn’t know the man. “We weren’t in his way whatsoever,” he said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200606/page/1/textview 2/2
