2020. 6. 18. OKC chief rejects heavyhanded police strategy

OKC chief rejects heavyhanded police strategy

The Oklahoman - 6 Jun 2020 - A1 - By William Crum Staff writer wcrum@oklahoman.com

Oklahoma City police Chief Wade Gourley says the notion of dominating the streets is a
losing strategy for law enforcement.

5

 

“Tf we did that we would have no relationship with the community and you wouldn't be
able to solve any crime,” Gourley said in an interview Friday.

President Donald Trump this week urged authorities to “dominate the streets” as unrest
swelled nationwide over the death of George Floyd in police custody in Minneapolis, where
an officer knelt on his neck for nearly nine minutes.

“We are not the police in this community, as weird as

that sounds ,” Gourley said .“It' s the citizens. They're the ones that call us when they see
an issue.

“A civil society — that's what keeps society the way it is,” he said. “It's not a police
department going out there and dominating. That's not what we are.”

Coming off several days of protests, Gourley said he would not submit his resignation as
sought by Black Lives Matter OKC, which earlier this week demanded t hat he step down,
then backed away.

But t he chief said he was open to apologizing for the actions of officers who responded to
protests with tear gas and arrests, if reviews determine they acted improperly.

A month shy of the oneyear anniversary of his appointment as chief, the 31- year Okla-
homa City Police Department veteran said the department already has made quite a few
changes and, “I would

like the opportunity to do more and improve more.”

As chief, he said, “you have a short window, a short amount of time to do as much as you
can. I want to set this organization up to be even better than when I got it.”

G our ley said he and the Rev. Sheri Dickerson, Black Lives Matter OKC's lead organizer,
have met several times during his tenure as deputy chief and now as chief.

“She knows me,” he said. “That's not a door that I need to open. It's open. Maybe I need to
walk through it instead of her.”

Black Lives Matter OKC's demands included apologies for police response to protests.

“If there's something there that we did wrong, I would have no problem doing that,”
Gourley said. “I haven't seen anything so far that I need to apologize for, but that doesn't
mean, once we review that, there may not be something there.”

Gourley made a fiveminute video this week as he walked outside near his office and said he
hoped those watching his video would take away from it that no police officer could watch

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/20200606/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. OKC chief rejects heavyhanded police strategy

the viral video of Floyd's death and not be upset by it.

“It hurts our profession, it hurts the community, it hurts that trust,” he said. “I feel like
every time we're building that up, we're making some good st rides, something like that
happens and it just knocks us back down.”

In conversations with his officers, G our ley said, nobody is justifying police officers' ac-
tions in Minneapolis, “Nobody's saying, Well I could see how that would happen.'
“They're all shocked that someone that's sworn to uphold not only the law but that com
munity trust could do that.”

Gourley ended his video by stating, “Black lives matter.”

“To the people that are involved in that organization, it's not a saying, it's not a title of
their group,” he said Friday.

“It means something,” Gourley said .“In their minds and what they've seen throughout
history, they believe that police don't take black lives into the same — they don't hold
them to the same level as others.

“To them, that's real. So I want them to know as a police officer and as a culture in our or-

ganization we do believe black lives matter.

“We want to institute policies and develop trust and things in the black community that
are helpful and not hurtful,” he said. “I think it was very important that I say that. It
wasn't something that was difficult.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/20200606/page/1/textview

2/2
