2020. 6. 17. Worship guidance: Choir warning is removed from CDC website.

Worship guidance: Choir warning is removed from CDC web-
site.

The Washington Post : 29 May 2020 - A1 - BY LENAH. SUN AND JOSH DAWSEY lena.sun@washpost.com
josh.dawsey@washpost.com

The Trump administration with no advance notice removed warnings contained in guid-
ance for the reopening of houses of worship that singing in choirs can spread the coron-
avirus.

 

Last Friday, the administration released pandemic guidance for faith communities after
weeks of debate flared between the White House and the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention. Those guidelines posted on the CDC website included recommendations that
religious communities “consider suspending or at least decreasing use of choir/musical
ensembles and congregant singing, chanting, or reciting during services or other pro-
gramming, if appropriate within the faith tradition.”

It added: “The act of singing may contribute to transmission of Covid-19, possibly through
emission of aerosols.”

By Saturday, that version was replaced by updated guidance that no longer includes any
reference to choirs or congregant singing and the risk for spreading virus. The altered
guidance also deleted a reference to “shared cups” among items, including hymnals and
worship rugs, that should not be shared. The updated guidelines also added language that
said the guidance “is not intended to infringe on rights protected by the First Amend-
ment.”

Two White House officials said the first version posted by the CDC was not approved by the
White House. Once West Wing officials saw it, they asked the CDC to post a different
cleared document without the choir references and other parts.

The officials, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to talk about policy discussions,
said there have long been concerns within the White House that there were too many re-
strictions on choirs. A CDC official who spoke on the condition of anonymity because he
was not authorized to speak about the guideline change also said the updated Saturday
guidance was approved by the White House.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200529/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Worship guidance: Choir warning is removed from CDC website.

Earlier this month, the CDC issued a report warning about “superspreader” events where
the coronavirus might be “highly transmissible in certain settings, including group
singing events.” That report described a choir practice in Washington state in March at
which one person ended up infecting 52 other people, including two who died.

“Members had an intense and prolonged exposure, singing while sitting 6-10 inches from
one another, possibly emitting aerosols,” the report said. The infections probably took
place during a 21/2-hour choir practice attended by 61 members.

White House officials battled for weeks with CDC aides about the scope of reopening
guidelines. Officials in Vice President Pence’s office, the domestic policy council and other
members on the president’s coronavirus task force were resistant to establishing limits on
religious institutions even as the CDC issued detailed road maps for reopening other set-
tings, including schools and restaurants, and as the agency warned of the dangers of sig-
nificant virus transmission rates at religious events.

Some officials in the White House and on the coronavirus task force did not want to alien-
ate the evangelical community and believed that some of the proposals, such as limits on
hymnals, the size of choirs or the passing of collection plates, were too restrictive, accord-
ing to two administration officials who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss
policy decisions.

Some restrictions imposed by state governments have become a point of contention for
conservative religious leaders, an important constituency in President Trump’s political
base.

Even as states have begun reopening, public health officials continue to warn against mass
gatherings or settings in which people will be in close quarters, and note that religious
gatherings have been the source of several outbreaks.

An outbreak at an Arkansas church killed three and infected dozens, according to a CDC re-
port. The outbreak began after a pastor at the church and his wife attended church events
during six days in early March and spread the virus. At least 35 of 92 attendees at church
events became infected, including the three who died, all over the age of 65. An additional
26 infections and one death in the community were probably linked to contact with people
infected at the church events, according to the report.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200529/page/1/textview 2/2
