2020. 6. 17. ‘DefiUciencies’ slow voting in Georgia

‘DefiLiciencies’ slow voting in Georgia
Georgians turn out in primaries with fewer poll workers, locations

The Dallas Morning News - 10 Jun 2020: 1A

With fewer polling places, voters endured heat, pouring rain and waits as long as five
hours to cast ballots in Georgia.

= =

= | =k

     

ATLANTA — Voters endured heat, pouring rain and waits as long as five hours Tuesday to
cast ballots in Georgia, demonstrating a fierce desire to participate in the democratic
process while raising questions about the emerging battleground state’s ability to manage
elections in November when the White House is at stake.

A confluence of events disrupted primary elections for president, U.S. Senate and dozens of
other contests.

The polls were staffed by fewer workers because of concerns about the coronavirus. A re-
duced workforce contributed to officials consolidating polling places, which dispropor-
tionately affected neighborhoods with high concentrations of people of color. Long lines
were also reported in whiter suburban areas.

Some voters said they requested mailin ballots that never arrived, forcing them to go to
polling places and adding to the lines. Turnout, meanwhile, may be higher than expected
as voters said they were determined to vote following the police killing of George Floyd in
Minneapolis and the ensuing demonstrations that swept cities including Atlanta.

There was also trouble with Georgia’s new voting system that combines touchscreens with
scanned paper ballots.

The developments were troubling heading into the fall presidential campaign, which will
attract even more voters. President Donald Trump and

Democrat Joe Biden are expected to fiercely compete in this rapidly changing state. That
leaves officials, who have already been criticized for attempting to suppress the vote, with
less than five months to turn things around.

The state’s chief election officer, Republican Secretary of State Brad Raffensperger, an-
nounced plans to investigate voting problems that plagued Fulton and Dekalb counties,
where roughly half the population is black.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 0/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. ‘DefiUciencies’ slow voting in Georgia

Republican House Speaker David Ralston directed leaders of the House Governmental Af-
fairs Committee to investigate the “unacceptable deficiencies” across the state, particu-
larly in Fulton County.

“The legislative branch of government has an obligation to go beyond the mutual finger
pointing and get to the truth and the real reasons underlying these frustrations and con-
cerns,” Ralston said.

Benaiah Shaw, who joined the protests against police brutality after Floyd’s death, said he
votes in every election but had never waited as long as he did on Tuesday — five hours.
“It’s really disheartening to see a line like this in an area with predominantly black resi
dents,” said Shaw, a 25yearold African American. He said he was appalled by how few vot-
ing machines were available.

Trump and Biden won their primaries in West Virginia. Americans were also voting in pri-
maries in Nevada and South Carolina. But the tumult in Georgia garnered much of the at-
tention, reinforcing concerns about managing elections amid the coronavirus.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 0/page/1/textview 2/2
