2020. 6. 17. The United States officially entered into a recession in February.
The United States officially entered into a recession in Febru-
ary.

As coronavirus spread, 128-month economic expansion came to an end

The Washington Post - 9 Jun 2020 - A1 - BY RACHEL SIEGEL rachel.siegel@washpost.com

The United States officially fell into a recession in February, ending a historic 128-month
expansion as the coronavirus swept the country and put the economy into a tailspin.

The Business Cycle Dating Committee, which tracks and dates business cycles for the Na-
tional Bureau of Economic Research, said the economy peaked just before the pandemic
forced business and social activity into a holding pattern. Recessions often refer to two
consecutive quarters of contraction, but the NBER’S calculation includes other factors,
such as domestic production and employment.

“The time that it takes for the economy to return to its previous peak level of activity or its
previous trend path may be quite extended,” the committee’s report said.

States and communities began issuing stay-at-home orders in mid-march to stem the
spread of the highly contagious virus. The moves prevented an estimated 60 million coro-
navirus infections in the United States, according to a study published Monday, but came
at a great cost to the economy. More than 40 million Americans lost their jobs as con-
sumers stayed out of shopping malls, restaurants, theaters and other places where crowds
gathers. Travel, tourism, retail and other industries were devastated, tipping such well-
known brands as J. Crew, Neiman Marcus and Hertz into bankruptcy.

Though the nation’s unemployment rate dropped to 13.3 percent in May, versus 14.7 per-
cent in April, the reading comes with an asterisk. The Bureau of Labor Statistics said it had
misclassified data in May, April and March. Without the error, the unemployment rate
would have been 16.3 percent for May and 19.7 percent for April, the agency said.

Now, as states gradually ease pandemic restrictions, the question will be whether “re-
opening” fuels an economic turnaround anytime soon, or whether the downturn will ex-
tend into next year as people struggle to go back to work and the nation contends with a
possible second wave of infections.

That the economy had plunged into a recession was not a surprise. As economist Ernie
Tedeschi put it: “It’s now official (and utterly unsurprising).”

Still, NBER’S report highlighted just how sharply the pandemic upended vast swaths of the
economy and closed the book on an expansion that started in June 2009.

“In the case of the February 2020 peak in economic activity, the committee concluded that
the drop in activity had been so great and so widely diffused throughout the economy that
the downturn should be classified as a recession even if it proved to be quite brief,” the re-
port noted.

In tracking business cycles and their inflection points, the NBER committee also takes into
account indicators such as initial unemployment insurance claims, wholesale retail sales
and industrial production. The committee’s official reports come retrospectively — or

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200609/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. The United States officially entered into a recession in February.

once it becomes clear there won’t be a need for major revisions even when more data be-
comes available.

Government officials and economists have offered different timelines for when the econ-
omy might rebound, offering up an alphabet soup of W-, V- and U-shaped recoveries that
could unfold later in the year or into 2021.

The nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office expects the economic consequences of the
novel coronavirus to exceed $8 trillion and suggests the economy will not fully recover un-
til 2030. It also expects unemployment to hover above 10 percent into 2021, meaning the
nation could still have joblessness that is worse than the Great Recession for months.

But experts say the turnaround will hinge on controlling the spread of the novel coron-
avirus, which has killed more than 109,000 people in the United States.

The NBER report had no effect on Wall Street, which is in the midst of a stunning three-
month rally. On Monday, the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index moved into positive terri-
tory for the year, the tech-heavy Nasdaq Composite set a record high and the Dow Jones
industrial average extended its winning streak to six days.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200609/page/1/textview 2/2
