2020. 6. 17. Social media: Influencers are recruited to fight covid-19.

Social media: Influencers are recruited to fight covid-19.

The Washington Post - 13 Jun 2020 - A1 - BY FRANCES STEAD SELLERS frances.sellers@washpost.com

Just as the coronavirus was establishing its deadly grip on the United States and President
Trump once again revised his often-contradictory assessment of its risks, comedian Chris
Rock posted a video for his 5.2 million Twitter followers. His message was brief and direct.

  

“During biblical times, Noah was the only one that took the rain serious. Everybody else
died. The coronavirus is the rain,” the former “Saturday Night Live” cast member intoned
in the late-March clip.

“We're all in this together. But we’ve got to stay six feet apart,” Rock continued, with a
quip about his uncut hair.

The 1-minute, 10-second video was Rock’s creation, but it was inspired by an unusual
nonpartisan coalition of experts who are repurposing new technologies to keep the most
vulnerable populations safe by providing them with clear guidance. They are drawing on
behavioral science, social media savvy, lessons from political campaigns and their own
connections to persuade influencers such as Rock to spread their messages.

And they are acting against the backdrop of a rising communications crisis in public health
— the failure of researchers to adapt to the rapidly changing media landscape combined
with the current politicization of science that has sidelined experts.

“Public health’s greatest underused tool is educating the public,” said Alfred Sommer,
former dean of the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health. “Now, it is playing
catch-up during a pandemic and with an administration that uneducates the public and
uses social media to mock facts, experts and expertise.”

Public health campaigns have historically relied on broad-based communications — such
as the televised antismoking advertisements that began in the late 1960s.

In times of crisis, officials such as Anthony S. Fauci of the National Institutes of Health
have stood alongside presidents to present a united front.

The National Organizing Coalition On Virus Information Distribution — or Nocovid project
— aims instead to meet people where they are, by determining which counties are most
vulnerable and then enlisting celebrity messengers along with trusted local leaders such as
physicians, fire chiefs and fifth-grade teachers to spread the word.

“That’s a lot better than Dr. Fauci telling Johnny to wear a mask,” said James Carville, the
Democratic political consultant who with his wife, longtime GOP strategist Mary Matalin,
is at the heart of the operation.

The coalition has developed an online “tool kit” for local leaders with links to resources
such as best practices, advice on tailoring messaging, and tips on how to find influencers

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200613/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Social media: Influencers are recruited to fight covid-19.

to disseminate their messages.

Steve Azar, a music and cultural ambassador in Mississippi, was already working with the
state when John Barry, best-selling author of “The Great Influenza” about the 1918 flu
outbreak, reached out to him.

“It just made sense,” Azar said. “Us entertainer types becoming a voice and vehicle.”
Philanthropist and former pro football player Herman Moore felt his ability to reach across
party lines and age groups would lend nonpartisan weight to his outreach.

“T’m for the people. Period,” he said. “I try and channel as best I can what is given to me as
good information for safety of the people.”

Several of the influencers fit a long-standing risk-communication strategy — of person-
alizing messages, engaging with the audience and encouraging collective action.
Twelve-year-old singer Angelica Hale described how her struggle with double pneumonia
and a kidney transplant almost a decade ago would show young people that they are not
bulletproof.

“T lived through it,” said Hale, who is trying to relay to her 2.4 million Facebook followers
the message that exposure to the virus might pose a threat to people like her who are im-
munocompromised.

The Nocovid mission was launched in March when Carville published an essay in the
Chronicle of Philanthropy gently chiding Barry, his friend, for preaching to the choir when
he published an op-ed in the New York Times about lessons from the 1918 flu. In the ab-
sence of White House leadership, Carville called on foundations to fund a unified patriotic
response that would bridge the country’s political and socioeconomic divides — “a Dream
Team made up of top leaders from Hollywood, technology, advertising, public relations,
polling, and behavioral psychology,” he wrote, that would target “every microslice of the
population.”

An initial day-long conference call included Carville, Matalin, Barry and Bryan Cunning-
ham, a cybersecurity and privacy lawyer who acted as moderator, and representatives from
Ogilvy, the marketing giant, and Palantir, the data-mining firm co-founded by PayPal’s
Peter Thiel.

Rock’s apocalyptic message, posted a few days later, has been viewed more than 81,000
times. When the group’s early data suggested that Newport News, Va., was in danger from
the virus, comic actress Wanda Sykes, who has local roots, went online to warn residents:
“It’s not just New York, New Jersey, no. This b---- has an E-zpass. The scientists and ex-
perts I trust are convinced the next hotspot will be area code 757.”

In the weeks since its founding, the Nocovid coalition has grown from eight to about 60,
including vaccine researchers and online audience experts who spend hours every week on
calls, delving into thorny issues such as the threats to civil liberties and privacy posed by
contact tracing.

“This isn’t looking to replace anything that public health is doing,” said Julie Schafer,
chief technology officer for Flu Lab, a nonprofit dedicated to vanquishing influenza. She
described the pooling of such disparate skills as unlike anything she had experienced in
her career.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200613/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Social media: Influencers are recruited to fight covid-19.

The need for localized messaging has become even clearer, she and other coalition mem-
bers say, as states relax restrictions, often resulting in different regulations — as well as
conflicting social and political pressures — on opposite sides of a county or state border.
Add to that an administration often at odds with public health officials from Fauci on
down.

Those competing forces fly in the face of what experts on public health messaging say is
the key to success — to sustain advice and back it, when possible, with policy even when it
is controversial and pits the needs of the community against personal behaviors such as
smoking in public buildings or not wearing a seat belt.

“If covid messages are not sustained, people will revert to old behaviors,” said Barbara Lo-
ken, an expert in brand management, health promotion and consumer psychology at the
University of Minnesota who co-authored a 2010 paper in the Lancet medical journal on
the use of mass media to change health behaviors.

Many scholars agree that public health officials have been slow to recognize the rapid
shifts to hyperlocal messaging and to platforms that attract younger generations.

“No one has really fixed the model of health communications for the 21st century,” said
Jay A. Winsten, director of the Center for Health Communication at Harvard’s School of
Public Health. Winsten, who popularized the “designated driver” concept through TV sit-
coms such as “Cheers,” suspended a course on communication skills at Harvard because
the cases were derived from the pre-social-media world.

While many health communications experts recognize they were lagging behind, none say
they were ready for the current politicization of science — and for Trump’s relentless
questioning of scientific data.

“He repeatedly parades forth public health experts only to ignore and then belittle their
advice to the public,” said Sommer.

At the same time, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has lost its voice of au-
thority.

“What they were really good at was foreshadowing: Here’s what we know; here’s what we
don’t; and here’s what we are doing,” said coalition member Bruce Gellin, president of
Global Immunization at the Sabin Vaccine Institute, who used to work at the CDC. “That’s
what we don’t get from anybody now.”

The coalition is awaiting data on the effects of reopening strategies to inform new mes-
saging, as well as examining ways to measure its impact by tracking the #nocovid hashtag.
“Until there is some sort of postmortem, you won’t know if you were really effective or
contributing materials out of goodwill,” said Chris Graves, a coalition member and expert
on behavior change at Ogilvy.

In the face of a deadly pandemic, he added, “we are prepared to do that.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200613/page/1/textview 3/3
