2020. 6. 17. Facebook workers intemally challenged decision on Trump

Facebook workers internally challenged decision on Trump

The Washington Post : 6 Jun 2020 - A1 - BY ELIZABETH DWOSKIN AND NITASHA TIKU

san francisco — At an emergency town hall meeting Facebook held this week — days after
President Trump posted, “When the looting starts, the shooting starts,” on his account —
5,500 Facebook employees had a demand for Mark Zuckerberg.

Before the meeting, the employees voted in a poll on which questions to ask the chief exec-
utive at the meeting, according to internal documents viewed by The Washington Post. The
question that got the most votes: “Can we please change our policies around political free
speech? Fact checking and removal of hate speech shouldn’t be exempt for politicians.”
Zuckerberg also met privately with black executives to discuss their pain and objections to
Trump’s post, which referred to responding to those protesting George Floyd’s death in
Minneapolis police custody. And employees questioned whether Facebook was in an “abu-
sive relationship” with the president, according to a trove of documents that included
more than 200 posts from an internal message board that showed unrest among employ-
ees.

Although some Facebook employees have taken to public forums such as Twitter to ex-
press their displeasure, the internal poll and the documents show just

how widely and quickly their dissent and discontent have spread after Zuckerberg’s deci-
sion to double down on allowing unfettered speech by politicians on the platform. He even
appeared on Fox News Channel last week to defend his viewpoint.

Facebook faces a boiling crisis that is dragging the company into yet another major con-
troversy, this one dealing with the explosive matters of police violence, race and free
speech. And Zuckerberg’s early public words about the issue — in which he said the presi-
dent’s post didn’t break the company’s rules against inciting violence — have sparked
widespread anger internally, with three employees quitting in protest and others com-
plaining about the post on rival site Twitter. Dozens of former employees signed a letter
critiquing the decision, saying it was a betrayal of Facebook’s early ideals.

But inside the company, criticism has been even more widespread and personal, according
to the documents, which show how many employees believe Trump is purposefully testing
them. Facebook, like other tech giants, has struggled to recruit African Americans, espe-
cially in its top ranks. That has led some employees to say that company leaders don’t un-
derstand how deep the issues go. Only 4 percent of employees are black, a number that
falls to 3 percent among senior leadership, according to Facebook’s latest diversity report.
Only one black person, diversity chief Maxine Williams, was involved in making the deci-
sion to leave Trump’s post up.

Employees in recent days have wrestled deeply with issues of race and free speech — sus-
pecting that Trump and other Republican leaders are purposefully testing social media
companies in the lead-up to the November election.

““What’s the point of establishing a principle if we’re going to move the goal posts every
time Trump escalates his behavior?” software engineer Timothy Aveni asked on an inter-
nal message board over the weekend. He quit this week.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200606/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. Facebook workers intemally challenged decision on Trump

“My toddler basically does the same thing to test boundaries,” another person said.
Silicon Valley companies, and particularly Facebook, tend to demand loyalty from employ-
ees, who typically sign nondisclosure agreements that forbid them to speak out publicly
about the company. The firms ply them with big salaries, perks and some measure of
voice: holding town hall meetings and allowing them to vent internally on message boards.
Facebook’s left-leaning workforce of about 45,000 full-time employees has been a target
of Trump.

But the 2016 presidential campaign changed the way the world — and workers — viewed
Facebook, after Russians interfered in it by amplifying divisive messages to millions of
Americans on the platform, showing how easily it could be exploited to hurt democracy.
Two years later, a privacy scandal involving Cambridge Analytica erupted. Political opera-
tives who had worked for the Trump campaign were found to have breached the personal
data of tens of millions of Americans.

Those two incidents and others have engendered a slow-burning crisis of confidence in the
company’s leadership and direction, according to employees there and the posts, creating
a flash point with last week’s events.

“We have teams around the company giving serious attention to the ideas we’re hearing,
especially those from our Black community,” spokeswoman Liz Bourgeois said in a state-
ment. “This is a time not just to listen but to act.”

Facebook’s decisions have left some employees questioning whether the company has
kowtowed to the right, said two executives who have been part of the discussions. Zucker-
berg made a personal call last year not to take down a video of House Speaker Nancy Pelosi
(D- Calif.) that was altered to make her appear drunk, and chose not to factcheck political
advertising or statements by politicians, said a person familiar with the decisionmaking
who spoke on the condition of anonymity for fear of retaliation.

Last week, Twitter marked erroneous tweets by the president about mail-in ballots with
factchecking labels for the first time. That prompted Trump to retaliate, signing an execu-
tive order that threatens to undermine a decades-old law that shields the tech industry
from being held legally responsible for harmful content on their platforms.

He also posted and tweeted about sending in the military to control looting and “thugs” at
the protests over the death of Floyd, who was black, using the phrase, “When the looting
starts, the shooting starts.” That was perceived as racially divisive comment because it had
a history of being used by segregationist politician George Wallace.

Twitter marked the post as breaking its policies against inciting violence, but Facebook,
which has a similar policy against provoking violence, decided not to follow suit. A week
ago, on May 29, Zuckerberg said in a public Facebook post that he would not take action,
because the company wants to enable free expression and public debate about political ac-
tivity — and because he did not think the post broke the company’s policies.

Facebook employees took another tack.

They tried to report Trump’s post, TASK T6770430, as problematic to trigger review by
content moderators — contractors who remove offensive content. Some dived into the
company’s systems to try to understand the rationale for keeping it up, while others

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200606/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. Facebook workers intemally challenged decision on Trump

counted the hours and said they assumed it was just a matter of time before a post that so
clearly broke the company’s policies would be removed.

“Tm trying to reassure myself that we will do something here. We HAVE to, surely? Are
there any lines that remain to be crossed?” someone asked.

They also unleashed complaints on Workplace, the internal messaging board.

“Tt might be a coincidence, but the timing of this feels like a test balloon . .. of what we
should expect through November 2020 and beyond,” said one person.

Employees directly involved in implementing the standards also weighed in. “This is ex-
actly the kind of content that can incite violence and is exactly what we should be taking
action on,” said one employee who worked on Facebook’s Societal Violence team for 15
months.

At the same time, a group of black executives met privately with Zuckerberg and Chief Op-
erating Officer Sheryl Sandberg on May 30 to protest the decision, according to the docu-
ments. The group collectively agreed to provide more input about content policy decisions,
such as how Facebook evaluates racial “dog whistles,” and to meet more frequently with
Zuckerberg and Sandberg.

Some on the message board pointed out the racially divisive history of the language in the
post.

On Tuesday, Zuckerberg decided he would hold an emergency town hall meeting, pushing
up the weekly companywide Q&A that is usually held on Thursdays.

During the gathering, Zuckerberg said the language in Trump’s post had “no history of
being read as a dog whistle for vigilante supporters to take justice into their own hands,”
according to a transcript obtained by Vox and workers who attended. The comment was a
reference to “aggressive, even excessive, policing,” he said, but he took Trump’s post to be
a warning or threat of using the military against looting.

Zuckerberg said that he had thought long and hard about the issue, but that when it came
to the moment when he could take it down, “he couldn’t get there.” He said he knew em-
ployees would be very upset.

He also said he was exploring a labeling option, similar to Twitter’s middle ground be-
tween removal and merely leaving a post up.

The remarks struck some employees as inconsistent because Facebook already had taken
down accounts by state actors and of military leaders in Myanmar, according to the execu-
tives. Facebook took down the accounts after criticism that the company had allowed mili-
tary leaders on the platform to threaten the Rohingya ethic group, helping to fuel a geno-
cide.

And employees were also surprised because Zuckerberg had said in past congressional tes-
timony that politicians were not exempt from the company’s prohibitions on inciting vio-
lence.

“I’m really bothered by the Q+A today,” one black employee wrote. “We hear where the
leaders of this country and our Execs stand and know that the Policy Matters more than
Black Lives.”

“What’s the point of establishing a principle if we’re going to move the goal posts every
time Trump escalates his behavior?”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200606/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. Facebook workers intemally challenged decision on Trump

Timothy Aveni, a Facebook software engineer who quit after posting this on an internal
message board

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200606/page/1/textview 4/4
