2020. 6. 17. New guidelines urge caution

New guidelines urge caution
States report rising numbers as more people venture out

The Dallas Morning News - 13 Jun 2020 - 1A - Luke Mclay, a high school senior, Cqroll Call, The Associated Press, The
Washington Post

WASHINGTON — The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention on Friday released new
guidelines for people who are considering venturing out in their communities again and
attending large gatherings, even as many states are reporting a rising number of cases of
the coronavirus.

 

March, said it is important for people to remember that the pandemic is ongoing. He said
people should continue social distancing and taking steps like hand washing and wearing a
cloth mask to protect themselves and others from the virus.

“TI know that people are eager to return to normal activities and ways of life; however, it’s
important that we remember that the situation is unprecedented and that the pandemic
has not ended,” Redfield said.

Drawing from various independent projections, the CDC reported that the number of U.S.
deaths from COVID19 will likely be between 124,000 and 140,000 by July 4. The nation now
has more than 114,000 virusrelated deaths, The New York Times reported. More than 2
million Americans have been infected by the coronavirus.

The CDC’S guidance for attending gatherings comes as President Donald Trump has said
he will return to holding large campaign rallies next week, and the Republican National
Committee announced that the party likely would gather in Jacksonville, Fla., in August for
Trump’s renomination. The RNC

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 3/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. New guidelines urge caution

has indicated it does not want to require participants to wear masks.

The new guidance also comes after more than a week of large protests against police bru-
tality across the nation in which many attendees and police did not wear masks.

The new guidance recommends that people attending gatherings use proper hand hygiene,
wear Cloth facial coverings and maintain social distancing by keeping a 6foot distance
from others. It says attending virtual events is the lowestrisk option, while the highestrisk
is attending a large, inperson gathering.

Anthony Fauci, the nation’s top infectious disease expert, said Friday that it is a “danger”
and “risky” for people to be gathering in large groups — whether at a Trump rally ora
protest. Speaking on ABC News’s Powerhouse Politics podcast, Fauci said that if the gath-
erings take place, people should “make sure” to wear a mask.

Tips for going out

When asked about the Trump campaign’s planned rallies, Jay Butler, the CDC’S deputy di-
rector of infectious diseases, said the guidance applied to all types of gatherings and were
suggestions, not requirements. He said people should not attend any types of gatherings if
they are sick.

“The guidelines are really for any type of gatherings, whether it’s the backyard barbecue or
something larger. And it’s not intended to endorse any particular type of event but to be
able to be applicable to any type of event that may occur,” Butler said.

On Thursday, the Trump campaign formally announced a rally on June 19, its first in
months. The campaign is asking supporters to waive liability if they are exposed to and
come down with COVID19 after attending the event in Tulsa, Okla.

Separately, the CDC laid out recommendations to help individuals reduce their risk for in-
fection as they resume daily activities. Besides urging people to continue taking precau-
tions such as handwashing, wearing face covering and keeping six feet from others, it
made specific suggestions for certain activities:

@ If going to the bank, use drivethrough services or ATMS.

@ If hosting a cookout, encourage people to bring their own food and drinks.

W If traveling overnight, consider taking the stairs at hotels, or wait to ride alone in the el-
evator or only with people from your household.

Reopenings continue

In recent days, the number of cases has risen in many states. Oregon Gov. Kate Brown, a
Democrat, said in a Thursday news release that she was pausing the state from further re-
opening for a week, calling it a “yellow light.”

“This oneweek pause will give public health experts time to assess what factors are driving
the spread of the virus and determine if we need to adjust our approach to reopening,” she
said. “I will work with doctors and public health experts to determine whether to lift this
pause or extend it or make other adjustments.”

Republican Gov. Gary Herbert of Utah also said he would halt lifting further restrictions for
the time being as new cases flare.

But many governors are coming down on the side of reopening their economies, even
though an Associated Press analysis this week found that cases were rising in nearly half
the states, a trend experts attributed in part to the gradual reopening of businesses.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 3/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. New guidelines urge caution

Texas hit highs this week for hospitalizations, with more than 2,100, and new COVID19
cases, prompting Houston’s top county official, Lina Hidalgo, to warn that “we may be ap-
proaching the precipice of a disaster.”

Dallas County has reported a record number of cases for three straight days, with 328 cases
reported Friday. The county has had 13,585 cases of COVID19 and 280 deaths.

Meanwhile, the state went ahead Friday with Republican Gov. Greg Abbott’s reopening
plan, allowing restaurants to expand eatin dining to 75% of capacity, up from 50%.

“Oh, yeah, I’ve been concerned,” 32yearold Renata Liggins said as she settled in front of a
plate of brisket at Black’s Barbecue in Austin. But “it just feels I can finally breathe a little
bit.”

Alabama has had more than a quarter of the state’s 23,000 cases reported in the past two
weeks as Republican Gov. Kay Ivey emphasized personal responsibility.

And Arkansas, where both active cases and hospitalizations have more than doubled since
Memorial Day, is letting restaurants seat more customers on Monday.

“Regardless of what we see in the next week, we made the right decision to go ahead and
lift some of these restrictions so we don’t cause more damage to people’s lives and their
livelihood,” Republican Gov. Asa Hutchison said.

‘We can’t stop living’

Florida, where Republican Gov. Ron Desantis publicly lobbied for the Republican conven-
tion by promising relatively few restrictions, has also had record infections in recent days.
California, which implemented the country’s first statewide stayathome order, entered the
most expansive phase of its gradual reopening Friday. Wineries started uncorking their
bottles and welcoming people back to their tasting rooms, and hotels, zoos, museums and
aquariums were also allowed to reopen.

Cases are rising as the state expands testing, but health officials say key metrics to watch
are the positivity rate among those tested and hospitalizations, and both have remained
relatively steady in recent weeks as businesses gradually reopened.

The state has “guardrails and cautions” in place that give officials confidence to continue
reopening, said Mark Ghaly, the state’s health and human services secretary.

Arizona has become one of the most troubling hot spots in the United States as new cases
have surged to more than 1,000 a day, up from fewer than 400 before stayathome orders
expired in midmay.

Republican Gov. Doug Ducey has given assurances that the health care system can handle
it, and Arizona’s health director, Dr. Cara Christ, said, “We are not going to be able to stop
the spread, and so we can’t stop living as well.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 3/page/1/textview 3/3
