2020. 6. 17. States shield some nursing homes from covid-19 suits

States shield some nursing homes from covid-19 suits

The Washington Post : 9 Jun 2020 - A1: BY DEBBIE CENZIPER, PETER WHORISKEY, SHAWN MULCAHY AND JOEL
JACOBS

One afternoon in early April, Brenda Anagnos crouched in the bushes outside a nursing
home in Windsor, Conn., and pressed her face to the window.

 
   

“yr | aay

: i ff =
“Mommy,” she yelled. “I’m here.”
From outside the locked-down facility, Anagnos said she watched her mother, wearing a
red tank top, shiver beneath a hospital sheet. Diagnosed with covid-19, she could barely
raise a hand. Anagnos said she called the front desk for a nurse, a blanket, some help with
an electrolyte drink.
Like others with family members in nursing homes, she said she was terrified about what
might be happening behind closed doors. Her fears grew the next morning when a family
friend peered through the window and took a photograph of Anagnos’s mother, Carol Bal-
lard, 81, lying on the floor in front of a wheelchair.
The grandmother of four died the next morning, on April 6, amid one of the deadliest
nursing home outbreaks in the country.
“She had life left,” Anagnos said. “She didn’t deserve to die like this.”
Anagnos and the bereaved families of other residents want answers from the home, where
47 of its 138 residents have died of covid-19 — more than one in three, according to facility
administrators. But exactly what happened at Kimberly Hall North during the chaotic early
weeks of the pandemic may never be known.
On the day before Ballard died, isolated from family members, Connecticut Gov. Ned La-
mont (D) issued an emergency order granting nursing homes immunity from most law-
suits during the coronavirus pandemic.
Similar to recent measures in about 20 other states, the Connecticut order has sweeping
implications, depriving potential plaintiffs not only of financial recourse in the courts but
the ability to uncover an accounting of their relatives’ last days in nursing homes. The de-
mand for information during the crisis has become particularly urgent: Since March, fed-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200609/page/1/textview 118
2020. 6. 17. States shield some nursing homes from covid-19 suits

eral officials have curtailed routine inspections and restricted visitors in homes, leaving
families to peer through windows or plead for information over the phone.

“Even with a history of these nursing homes having problems, why was immunity put in
place?” Anagnos said. “I’m not looking for money. I’m looking for somebody to be held
accountable.”

Officials with Genesis HealthCare, which owns Kimberly Hall North and is the nation’s
largest nursing home chain, said staff members did everything they could to prevent the
spread of infection and treat sick patients. Two employees without symptoms probably in-
troduced the novel coronavirus in mid-march before anyone knew it was there and before
health experts understood that it could spread from apparently healthy carriers, said
Richard Feifer, chief medical officer for the Pennsylvania-based chain, in emails and an
interview with The Washington Post.

“The staff caring on the front line for residents have shared in the emotion and grief fami-
lies have felt, and we understand how difficult a time this has been,” he said. “With that
said, the experience we have had with our families at Kimberly Hall North has been over-
whelmingly positive.”

For weeks, health-care associations nationwide have pressed governors for immunity
from lawsuits, in some cases offering specific language for emergency orders, according to
letters, public statements and media accounts. The groups also have appealed to Health
and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar, House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (DCalif.) and Senate
Majority Leader Mitch Mcconnell (R-KY.), who vowed on the Senate floor last month to
extend new coronavirus-related protections to a number of groups, including the health-
care industry.

Mcconnell, like other advocates for immunity, cast the measures as a way to protect
“healthcare heroes” — doctors, nurses, researchers — from nuisance lawsuits.

“We are not going to let healthcare heroes emerge from this crisis facing a tidal wave of
medical malpractice lawsuits so that trial lawyers can line their pockets,” he announced.
But what plaintiffs’ lawyers and patient advocacy groups contest most is not whether im-
munity should be extended to healthcare personnel, but whether those protections should
also extend to nursing homes and their owners. In their view, troubled facilities ought to
remain subject to litigation resulting from lifethreatening failures in infection control and
patient care, and families offered a chance to pierce the layers of secrecy that often sur-
round unexpected or unexplained deaths.

Since the start of the pandemic, more than 30,000 nursing home residents have died of
covid-19, state data shows. Through the discovery process in civil litigation, family mem-
bers would have an opportunity to obtain medical and company records and the sworn de-
positions of caregivers and company officials.

“The industry seized on this crisis to try to get a get-out-of-jailfree card,” said Steve
Levin, a lawyer in Chicago who is working with about 100 nursing home residents and
families who plan to file suit in Illinois, despite the state’s immunity order. “I’ve never
seen anything like it.”

The immunity measure in Connecticut, where state officials have reported 2,500 covid-19
deaths linked to nursing homes, came after a group of health-care associations banded to-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200609/page/1/textview 2/8
2020. 6. 17. States shield some nursing homes from covid-19 suits

gether to appeal for relief. In a March 31 letter to the governor’s office, reviewed by The
Post, the group proposed wording for an executive order. Five days later, Lamont issued an
order using some language from the letter.

Lamont’s office did not respond to repeated requests for comment, but his emergency or-
der said that immunity would encourage “maximum participation” from health-care
workers during the pandemic. Like those in other states, the order does not protect nurs-
ing homes from the most egregious allegations, those involving gross negligence, criminal
activity or willful misconduct.

Already, members of three families from Kimberly Hall North say they have had trouble
finding lawyers willing to consider legal remedies.

Among them is Roberta James-Brown, who described the quality of care at the home be-
fore the pandemic as “impeccable.” Now, she questions how her bedridden father became
infected and why she didn’t receive more information in the final days of his life.

She said a caregiver at the home told her on April 7 that her father had a high fever. The
next day, she said, the home said he was feeling better, eating, talking and sitting up in
bed. On April 9, Johnny James, an Army veteran who liked to share Hershey bars with his
great-grandchildren, was dead at 85 from covid-19.

“T don’t even know if they were neglectful, but I do know my father is dead because of
covid, and he wasn’t walking around that facility picking it up by himself,” James-brown
said. “I want a clear picture of what really went on there.”

James-brown lodged a complaint with the Connecticut Department of Public Health. Ina
May 27 letter, the department confirmed that it would open an investigation. She also con-
tacted a law firm but said she was advised by an attorney that the immunity order would
make an individual case more difficult. She faults the governor and his advisers for shield-
ing nursing homes.

“He’s trying to make them untouchable, which means they don’t have to be accountable
for what happened,” she said. “And that’s not okay.”

Feifer, the chief medical officer for Genesis, declined to comment on individual cases. He
said the home sought in March to have all 138 residents tested but the state could provide
only six tests. A week later, the state provided six more.

So far, 120 residents at Kimberly Hall North have been infected, according to the home. So
have 43 of 157 employees.

The extent of the outbreak at Kimberly Hall North, Feifer said, reflects the frailty of the pa-
tients there, as well as the fact that many had dementia, a condition that can make social
distancing difficult to enforce. He added that the outbreak came early, striking before the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention warned that infected people without symptoms
could spread the virus.

Feifer said the home set up video conferences to keep families informed and adopted strin-
gent infection-control measures, such as the universal use of masks. He also pointed out
that the home had a series of inspections since the start of the outbreak and that no defi-
ciencies related to patient care or infection control were found. The staff, Feifer said, “did
everything they could do and more.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200609/page/1/textview 3/8
2020. 6. 17. States shield some nursing homes from covid-19 suits

On April 20, however, government inspectors cited the home for not documenting whether
a covid-19 patient at risk of weight loss and dehydration was consistently consuming food
and fluids. Although a care plan in February had instructed the staff to report any signs of
malnourishment to the doctor and dietitian, the resident’s fluid consumption in April had
decreased by half, according to the inspection report.

Feifer described the inspectors’ findings as “tags ... for incomplete documentation” rather
than breakdowns in patient care.

The findings provide only a limited glimpse inside the home, but the citation is one of the
few records available to families of the dead.

Acall to action

Although nursing homes have ranked among the deadliest of all group settings during the
pandemic, the disparity in coronavirus cases is still a medical mystery: Why have some
homes, such as Kimberly Hall North, had dozens of deaths while others have been able to
contain the outbreaks? By helping to stave off scrutiny, legal immunity makes it less likely
that the public will ever fully know, lawyers and patient advocacy groups say.

The push to protect the industry has played out in state capitols across the country. Indus-
try associations have appealed to the governors of Florida, Maine, Pennsylvania and Ten-
nessee, among others. In California, the groups in an April 9 letter offered Gov. Gavin
Newsom (D) language for a proposed order: “All state statutes and regulations are hereby
waived to the extent necessary to achieve this immunity.”

In New York, a massive state budget bill in early April included an immunity provision
covering homes and workers. The Greater New York Hospital Association lauded the move
in a news release, saying the group had “drafted and aggressively advocated” for the legis-
lation and thanking Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo (D) and legislators for “working with us so ef-
fectively.”

A spokesperson for Cuomo said that the provision does not excuse gross negligence and
that it was passed when officials were worried about running out of critical care beds.

“Tf we had not done this, we never would have had enough front-line health-care workers
working and taking care of patients,” said Dani Lever, the governor’s communications di-
rector.

In Connecticut, where Anagnos’s mother died, industry groups offered Lamont language
for an order, suggesting in a letter that health facilities “shall be immune from civil liabil-
ity for any injury or death alleged to have been sustained as a result of an act or omission in
the course of providing medical or other health care services in support of the State of
Connecticut’s response to the COVID-19 outbreak.”

Lamont’s April 5 order, which borrowed phrases from the letter, granted immunity to
health-care businesses and their workers.

Since the pandemic began, about 20 states have approved immunity orders, most shielding
both companies and employees. Some states, including California and Florida, have re-
sisted calls for action. Others, including Maryland, already had some form of immunity in
place during emergencies.

Industry groups also contacted national lawmakers, sending an April 8 letter to Pelosi and
Mcconnell that called on Congress to “follow the lead of several states and immediately

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200609/page/1/textview 4/8
2020. 6. 17. States shield some nursing homes from covid-19 suits

adopt legislation.” The letter was sent by the Health Coalition on Liability and Access,
which represents 36 associations, including the American Health Care Association.

The groups argue that nursing homes and front-line workers are responding to an un-
precedented health emergency and deserve protection from lawsuits, particularly when
medical equipment and tests are in short supply. The protection comes as the industry
continues to lobby for federal aid, with the government recently agreeing to release nearly
$5 billion in relief funding to the country’s 15,000 Medicarecertified nursing homes.

“It’s critical that states provide the necessary liability protection staff and providers need
to provide care during this difficult time without fear of reprisal,” said Mark Parkinson,
president of the American Health Care Association and the National Center for Assisted
Living, which represents 14,000 long-term-care providers.

A long-standing agenda

Patient advocacy groups and legal organizations counter that even before the pandemic,
many homes had been unable or unwilling to meet basic health, safety and staffing stan-
dards set by the federal government. Nursing homes, critics say, could use immunity to
evade long-standing liabilities.

A Post analysis in April found that 40 percent of nursing homes with reported coronavirus
cases had been cited more than once in recent years for violating federal standards meant
to prevent the spread of infections. A report by the Government Accountability Office last
month, which cites The Post’s analysis, found that 82 percent of homes had been cited
over a five-year period for lapses in infection control and prevention.

Watchdog groups say the industry used the coronavirus emergency to push a long-stand-
ing agenda to limit liability and lawsuits. For decades, nursing homes have lobbied to set
legal limits for damage payments and to compel nursing home residents to forgo the
courts and take their cases to arbitration, where homes more easily prevail, lawyers said.
Even without immunity, proving how the coronavirus slipped inside a home is difficult,
plaintiffs’ lawyers say.

“This so-called flood of litigation is simply not going to materialize,” said Robert Sachs,
past chairman of the nursing home litigation group at the American Association for Jus-
tice. “These are going to be very difficult cases to prove on a number of levels. The hurdles
are high.”

Levin, the Chicago lawyer, said he plans to show that homes with a history of staffing
shortages and poor care did not stop the spread of the coronavirus or properly provide
treatment to ailing patients.

“Yes, it’s a challenge,” he said. “But it’s a challenge we feel that many long-term -care
providers will not be able to meet because they had absolutely nothing in place for an in-
fectious-disease-type pandemic. They were wholly unprepared.”

Families say they are willing to take a gamble in court.

Brian Jones, who lost his 78year-old mother to covid-19 at Kimberly Hall North in April,
said he was told after her diagnosis that she was faring well and was comfortable. “It was
like a couple of days,” he said, “and she was dead.”

He said that his family has struggled to learn more but that several lawyers declined to
take the case. He said he questions the governor’s decision to offer immunity to nursing

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200609/page/1/textview 5/8
2020. 6. 17. States shield some nursing homes from covid-19 suits

homes.

“They don’t live in it. They don’t deal with it. They don’t see it,” Jones said.

Feifer, the chief medical director of Genesis Healthcare, said the company was unable to
comment on the cases but added that caregivers did everything possible to keep family
members informed and provide lifesaving care. “I have confidence, he said, “that the team
at Kimberly Hall North was highly communicative . .. and highly transparent.”

‘Peacefully and quickly’

Anagnos’s mother, Carol Ballard, died at Kimberly Hall North four days after her 81st
birthday.

Ballard raised two daughters on a secretary’s salary, scraping together money for gymnas-
tics lessons and a rented duplex in Manchester, Conn. She danced to country music and
sang in the church choir before settling into an assisted-living community and, one year
ago, the memorysupport unit of Kimberly Hall North.

“T’ve got a good feeling,” Anagnos recalled saying the day she toured the building. “This is
all working out.”

In January, when Anagnos visited from Pennsylvania, Ballard ate pizza and walked the
aisles of a Target store. Anagnos promised that she would be moving back to Connecticut
with her husband and young daughters. “Only a few more months,” she told her mother.
On March 24, however, Ballard developed a fever and cough. Her roommate came down
with the same symptoms, according to Ballard’s records from the home, which Anagnos
provided to The Post. A covid-19 test came back positive, the records show, and nurses
were instructed to be sure that Ballard had enough to eat and drink.

On March 30, Ballard was found on the floor of her room. Records from the home say that
she “sat herself on the floor.” Anagnos said she received a call from the home but was not
given details.

Anagnos sent a text to a social worker at the home.

“T’m so upset. What is happening?” Anagnos said, according to the exchange, which she
provided to The Post. “Did she fall? Is she going crazy?”

“It’s OK. I heard earlier today that they saw her sit herself on the floor then scoot on butt,”
the social worker replied. “Maybe she felt weak (?) It could be increased confusion related
to everything.”

On April 2, Ballard’s 81st birthday, the home wrote that she was at nutritional risk, con-
suming only about half her fluids. On a video call that day, Anagnos said she cried when
she saw her mother, who was groggy and asking for a Coke. “We’re coming home,” she re-
called telling her mother.

The next day, Anagnos loaded her husband, two daughters, cat and a Chihuahua named
Chili into two cars, bound for the New Jersey Turnpike. After speaking to her mother by
phone, Anagnos said, she called the nursing home but could not get through. Again, she
texted the social worker.

“I just spoke to my mom and she said she is awful!!! She wants to eat and drink," Anagnos
wrote. “Very thirsty! Please someone check on her.”

“There is something wrong with our phones that are [sic] are trying to fix,” the social
worker texted back. “I will try to track the nurse down while I’m on my call.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200609/page/1/textview 6/8
2020. 6. 17. States shield some nursing homes from covid-19 suits

“T told her she has to fight this!"" Anagnos replied. “She said she has never felt so bad! ...
She needs hydration to help her mind as well. Praying this is the worst of it.”

The social worker told Anagnos that a staff member had confirmed Ballard was stable.
“She just got her fluids and your mom drank well,” the social worker wrote. “Appetite
hasn’t been great but they are encouraging her to eat.”

In Connecticut the next day, Anagnos stood behind a bush outside her mother’s window.
She said she saw her mother wearing a tank top and an adult diaper, barely able to wave.
For nearly an hour, Anagnos said, no one came into the room.

“You've just got to drink,” Anagnos recalled shouting when she saw a water bottle on her
mother’s nightstand. Ballard sat up slowly, and Anagnos said she watched as her mother
fumbled with the cap. From her cellphone, Anagnos reached a receptionist, who eventually
sent in an aide to help Ballard take a few sips from a cup.

Ballard’s head wobbled and fell, and the aide lowered the top of the bed. Anagnos said she
decided her mother needed to rest and walked back to her car in tears.

Later that day, she sent a text to the social worker. “I was asked kindly today if I would st...
calling so much,” Anagnos wrote. “After visiting my mom through window for over an
hour — she was with only a sheet, a Depends and a sleeveless top! Her fluids were next to
her, but no one ever came to help her drink! ... Can you please give me the name and num-
ber of a supervisor?”

The social worker replied: “You would have to call the main # and ask for the nursing su-
pervisor. I can ask the nursing director to call you if you’d like.”

The next day, Anagnos said she arrived to find her mother in someone else’s pajamas, ly-
ing in a fetal position and twitching in bed. “Mom,” she recalled yelling. “Can you see
me?”

Anagnos called out for an aide who had delivered food. “She’s not going to make it, is
she?” she yelled from outside. Anagnos could not hear the answer through the window.
Anagnos headed to her car and used her cellphone to look up the symptoms seen in pa-
tients before death. Then she walked back to the window for the last time.

“Mom, just go,” she finally said. “Go. It’s okay.”

A family friend who is an emergency room technician visited a few hours later and snapped
a photo of Ballard lying alone on the floor of her room. She called Anagnos, who called the
home. Staff members put Ballard back in bed, Anagnos said. Records from the home noted
that Ballard had fallen.

The next morning, she died. “Resident went peacefully and quickly per nurse. Call placed
to daughter,” according to the records. “Condolences offered. Resident’s [daughter] does
want her stuff. Housekeeping notified to pack items & store.”

Feifer, the medical director, said he could not comment on the specifics of the case, citing
privacy laws. In general, he said, patients sometimes fall despite the efforts of staff mem-
bers and that some in the medical community have debated whether aggressive hydration
through IVS for some coronavirus patients can have detrimental effects.

“It would be misleading to portray the excellent level of care provided at this center, even
amid the extraordinarily difficult circumstances covid-19 has posed, through the prism of
one or two subjective accounts,” he said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200609/page/1/textview 718
2020. 6. 17. States shield some nursing homes from covid-19 suits

Anagnos said she believes the home did not do enough to keep her mother hydrated and
safe. She also questions why her mother wasn’t taken to a hospital.

After she buried her mother, she called Connecticut state lawmakers. Sen. Dan Champagne
(R) wrote a letter to state health officials in April. “It appears to be neglect on the part of
the nursing home, which contributed to the overall rapid decline of this patient. Can your
office please investigate this and take appropriate action?”

Since then, Anagnos said she has been trying to find a lawyer willing to sue the home. Two
said they were not accepting covid-19 cases and a third declined, citing the governor’s im-
munity order.

“My mother could have beat covid. I know it in my heart of hearts,” she said, adding: “No
one cared or paid much attention. I just feel like someone should be held accountable.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200609/page/1/textview 8/8
