2020. 6. 17. A protest

A protest

Police in riot gear wade in after gunfioire, which city says came from the
crowd

The Dallas Morning News - 30 May 2020 - 1A + By AVA WALLACE and ROMAN STUBBS

 

LOUISVILLE — The night had started as a peaceful demonstration, with chants of “no jus-
tice, no peace” and shouts of the name of Breonna Taylor — one of a string unarmed
African Americans whose deaths at the hands of police have drawn attention in recent
weeks.

It ended in chaos, with seven people wounded by gunfire that city officials said originated
in the crowd and spurred police in riot gear to engage with protesters. The victims were in
stable or good condition Friday.

Taylor, a 26yearold emergency medical technician, was sleeping in the middle of the night
on March 13 when police entered her home to execute a noknock drug warrant. Her
boyfriend, thinking the police were armed intruders, fired a gun; police returned fire and
Taylor was hit eight times. She died at the scene.

No drugs were found, according to a lawsuit filed by Taylor’s family, which accuses offi-
cers of wrongful death, excessive force and gross negligence. The FBI is investigating.
Thursday night’s protests in Louisville represented a tipping point for many in a city that
residents say is not prone to widespread demonstrations of this sort. The last Louisville
protests close to Thursday’s scale were deadly race riots in 1968.

But in the wake of Taylor’s death and the more recent deaths of Ahmaud Arbery in
Brunswick, Ga., and George Floyd in Minneapolis, black and white Louisvillians took to the
streets Thursday.

Only three of an estimated 600 demonstrators were arrested, but there was significant de-
struction downtown. Windows were broken on government buildings, garbage cans were
hoisted atop cars and the right hand was torn off a statue of Louis

XVI near City Hall.

Protesters, exhausted by the coronavirus pandemic, were desperate to speak out against
police brutality. Black residents wanted to demonstrate their longsimmering distrust of
local police.

“It’s like things are coming to a head, it’s almost collecting nationwide, and I think that
kind of amped up Louisville protesters,” said Haven Harrington, a community organizer

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200530/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. A protest

on the city’s west side. “Normally people in Louisville don’t protest quite like this, to this
scale. All these [deaths] happened back to back to back. The country as a whole is charged.”
Thursday’s protest took place downtown, just a few blocks east of what locals call the
Ninth Street divide, the corridor that demarcates the largely African American communi-
ties in west Louisville from the largely white neighborhoods in the rest of the city.

It’s where many of the city’s hospitals and government buildings are clustered along with
hotels and the University of Louisville’s basketball arena, the KFC Yum! Center, where
Thursday night police engaged with protesters.

Around 10:30 p.m., gunshots rang out in the crowd and seven people were wounded. Police
sprayed tear gas and fired rubber bullets, according to multiple witnesses.

In a news conference Friday morning, Mayor Greg Fischer said five of the shooting victims
were in good condition and two others, who were sent to surgery, were in stable condition.
Assistant Police Chief Lavita Chavoussaid two police officers were taken to the hospital
with conditions “spurred by the events.”

Fischer denounced the violence but called for peaceful protests and acknowledged demon-
strators’ concerns, indefinitely suspending noknock warrants.

After Taylor’s death, Fischer’s administration handed the police’s internal probe of the
shooting over to Kentucky’s attorney general and sent the findings to the U.S. attorney’s
office and the FBI, which has since opened its own investigation.

“These changes and more to come — we’re not done — should signal that I hear the com-
munity. ... Breonna Taylor’s name and her story will now be part of our city’s history. But
as Breonna’s family shared last night,” Fischer said, referencing a video message from
Taylor’s sister, “answering violence with violence only makes things worse.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200530/page/1/textview 2/2
