2020. 6. 18. Ex-AG seeks prosecution of cockfighting bird exporters

Ex-AG seeks prosecution of cockfighting bird exporters

The Oklahoman « 27 May 2020 - A1 - By Randy Ellis Staff writer rellis@oklahoman.com

Former Oklahoma Attorney General Drew Edmondson has sent emails to federal and state
prosecutors in eastern Oklahoma asking them to investigate allegations that game f owl
breeders within their jurisdictions are among the leading exporters of roosters to Guam for
the purpose of cockfighting.

| DaFeed Store |
Z ia as ee

      

“The Eastern District is fraught with individuals who have been involved in the global traf-
ficking and fighting of birds,” said Edmondson, who represents several animal rights
groups. “It is a felony under state and federal law to buy, sell, deliver or own any bird with
the intent that such bird shall engage in a cockfight, and that's clearly what we're seeing."
Edmondson said his emails to prosecutors were prompted by an investigation by Animal
Wellness Action and Animal Wellness Foundation t hat revealed individuals from eastern
Oklahoma were three of the top five shippers of birds to Guam over a period of three years.
Edmondson serves as cochair of t he National Law Enforcement Council, which he de-
scribed as an arm of Animal Wellness Action and the Animal Wellness Foundation.
Investigators with the two organizations examined about 2,500 pages of avian shipping
records obtained through public records requests submitted to the Guam Department of
Agriculture, Edmondson said. They were able to identify about 750 shipments of birds to
Guam from more than a dozen states that occurred from November 2016 through Septem-
ber 2019, he said.

“Guam is an area where until recently cockfighting was legal, although it was illegal under
United States law to ship (fighting) birds to any state or territory anywhere around the
world.”

In the shipping do cuments, more than 8,800 of t he shipped birds were identified as
“brood fowl,” but there is “no legitimate explanation for this volume of shipments,” the
animal rights organizations said in a news release.

“The ratio of roosters to hens are anywhere from 10 to 1 to 100 to 1,” Edmondson said at a
virtual news conference .“That indicates i t's not brood stock at all. It is intended for the
fighting rings of Guam. That is a violation not only of federal law, but also a violation of
state law.”

Although cock fighting has been banned for years in Oklahoma, it remains the “cockfight-
ing capital of the United States,” alleged Wayne Pacelle, founder of Animal Wellness Ac-
tion. “The practice is cruel and barbaric, and long-distance movement soft he birds
threaten to spread avian influenza and jeopardize animal and human health.”

Pa celle said birds were shipped to Guam in boxes, without food or water.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/20200527/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. Ex-AG seeks prosecution of cockfighting bird exporters

“Tobe stuck in a cargo hold for several days, which is often what happens, is a life-threat-
ening situation,” he said. “I think it speaks to the lack of concern for the well-being of
these animals.”

“We don't want Oklahoma to be first in these blood sport matters,” said Louisa McCune,
executive director of the Kirk patrick Foundation, which supports a number of animal wel-
fare causes.

In an email to federal prosecutor Brian Kuester, U.S. Attorney for the Eastern District in
Musko gee, Edmond son identified a Heavener couple and individuals from Stig le rand
Tahlequah as being among the leading shippers of fighting roosters to Guam.

“T write to ask for your attention and prosecution of ongoing felony violati ons of state and
federal laws banning cock fightin ga nd related activity ,” Edmondson said. “The three in-
dividuals identified in this investigation brazenly defy 1 aw enforcement officers. This de-
serves the attention of law enforcement officers and prosecutors, and that's what we're
asking for.”

Copies of the email also were sent to Cherokee County District Attorney Jack Thorp,
Haskell County District Attorney Chuck Sullivan and Le Flore County District Attorney Jeff
Smith, Edmondson said.

Kuester said he had not yet seen the email and was not in a position to comment.

Thorp said he was in the process of reviewing the email.

“Generally, with anything of this nature there would have to be a law enforcement investi-
gation before any type of a prosecution,” Thorp said. “I will be forwarding the information
that I have received to law enforcement in Cherokee County.”

Thorp said he was not familiar with the Cherokee County man identified in the email and
was not aware of activities described in the email going on within his prosecutorial district.
Sullivan, the Haskell County prosecutor, said he received the email but had not yet had a
chance to review it.

“Anytime I'm notified of a crime being committed in my district, I'll look into it,” Sullivan
said. “I'm not going to ignore it.”

Smith could not be reached for comment.

Edmondson said he submitted his initial requests to prosecutors in Oklahoma, since three
of the top five exporters of roosters to Guam were from this state, but said similar requests
will be made to prosecutors in other states later based on the information uncovered dur-
ing the investigation.

There were 71 total exporters involved including eight from Oklahoma, but the top five
were responsible for more than half of the total shipments, Pacelle said.

Other Oklahoma s hi ppers also will be targeted, Edmondson said.

Edmond son said he hopes to send a message to cockfighters and shippers throughout Ok-
lahoma.

“This is our first move,” he said. “Next, we're coming after you.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/20200527/page/1/textview 2/2
