2020. 6. 17. Facing foreclosure amid crisis

Facing foreclosure amid crisis
Do two local eviction stories predict coming wave of repossessions?

The Dallas Morning News - 9 Jun 2020 - 1A - By KEVIN KRAUSE Staff Writer kkrause@dallasnews.com

Fear of a deadly contagion was great enough to prompt authorities to spare residents the
threat of eviction, but it didn’t stop some people from losing their homes.

 

Mike Mullen’s $9 million mansion in Old Preston Hollow is fashioned like a French
chateau, with more than 13,600 square feet of space. The former NFL linebacker and oil rig
tycoon has lived there since 2005, according to property records.

But on May 5, his lender sold the house during a Dallas foreclosure auction that no one at-
tended — during the height of the coronavirus scare, according to a lawsuit Mullen filed.
The sale occurred despite a notice in red letters on Dallas County’s website, saying: “Due to
COVID19, all Foreclosure Sales are Cancelled Until Further Notice.”

Christopher Hankins said he learned on April 15 while at work that his lender repossessed
the 32foot travel trailer in which he lived — from a lot in Sanger. It was hauled away with
all of his belongings, he said.

Hankins, 40, who owns an auto garage, said he was up to date on his trailer payments. But
his two dogs were put on the street, and his trailer was hauled off with everything else in-
side, leaving him homeless.

“T had to buy new underwear and socks,” said Hankins, who is now living in a motel. “I
had nothing. He stole it all.”

Both men have sued to regain their homes. Their financing companies have denied the al-
legations. Although a handful of other states enacted moratoriums on repossessions dur-
ing the coronavirus crisis, Texas was not one of them.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200609/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. Facing foreclosure amid crisis

Most large, national financing companies decided to voluntarily halt or scale back repos-
sessions and home foreclosures during the pandemic, while many momandpop outfits
continued with business as usual, legal experts say.

Expiring soon

The situation is about to get worse, consumer advocates warn. Millions of Americans af-
fected by the economic crisis are skipping mortgage and other loan payments, and some
COVID19 hardship programs are set to expire soon. About 3 million auto loans and 9% of
home mortgages are in some sort of forbearance plan, according to a report by National
Public Radio.

The city of Dallas created a temporary assistance program that offers rental and mortgage
relief to residents in need. It’s aimed at helping individuals and families who are at risk of
eviction or foreclosure due to the coronavirus pandemic. More than 2.2 million Texans
have filed for unemployment since COVID19 began its spread in March.

Dallas County, along with Bexar and Harris counties, has also halted propertytax foreclo-
sure auctions since the pandemic reached Texas. But no order is linked to the notice of
canceled foreclosures on Dallas County’s website, and there is some confusion about it in
the local mortgage industry.

Marcus Leinart, a local bankruptcy lawyer, said home foreclosure postings in the county
are “way down.” But he said he would be “nervous” about telling a client facing a mort-
gage foreclosure in Dallas that they had nothing to worry about due to a “onesentence
thing in red letters on this web page.”

He and other local bankruptcy lawyers say the only home mortgage foreclosures they are
aware of that were suspended involve federally backed mortgages like Fannie Mae. Leinart
said foreclosures at the George Allen courthouse in downtown Dallas happen on the first
Tuesday of every month, regardless what date it falls on, and he can’t remember a time
when it was ever halted.

The Texas Office of Consumer Credit Commissioner, which regulates nonbank financial
services, urged lenders in March to work with borrowers during the coronavirus crisis, in-
cluding suspending vehicle repossessions and property foreclosures.

Leinart said larger creditors are probably nervous about “bad press” if they become “too
aggressive” with their customers. Many, he said, are taking a “much softer approach” or
are ceasing foreclosures and repossessions altogether.

“The severity of the maliciousness of their actions is multiplied by the fact that their greed
took place in time that they intentionally took gross advantage of great crisis and chaos of
shutdowns caused by worldwide pandemic,” Mullen’s lawsuit said.

Secret sale?

Mullen, 70, declined to comment about his case due to the litigation.

His lawsuit alleges that the note holder had “intentionally and shamefully taken advan-
tage” of the pandemic for “unconscionable greed and personal gain.”

Mullen’s career in the energy service industry began in the late 1970s after playing football
for the Miami Dolphins, who drafted him in 1973.

He started his own company in 1985 and began buying oilfield equipment such as offshore
drill ships during market downturns and selling them for a profit when the economy

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200609/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. Facing foreclosure amid crisis

sparked back to life. He and his partners also have leased out spacious and wellappointed
oil rig housing units across the globe.

Mullen was back on TV in the late 1990s as an eligible bachelor oilman seeking love on the
Oprah Winfrey show.

Tensions and political unrest in the Middle East persuaded Mullen last year to transition to
renewable energy with the development of offshore wind farms in Taiwan. His business
ventures also have included buying and selling luxury aircraft.

In April, a company called MNP1 that held the note on Mullen’s house posted it for foreclo-
sure, according to Mullen’s lawsuit.

MNP! “secretly conducted an illegal foreclosure sale” of the home on the morning of May
5 without a single third party present at the auction, the lawsuit said. Mullen still lives in
the home.

The suit accuses MNP1 of “grossly underbidding” on the $9 million house and buying it for
$5.5 million. Mullen was in the “final stages” of negotiating a sale of his house at the time,
the lawsuit says.

“The fact that Dallas County offitcially cancelled all foreclosure sales made it a foregone
conclusion that no potential purchaser would possibly show up to bid at the illegal foreclo-
sure,” the lawsuit said. “A foreclosure sale conducted in a county that had offiOcially can-
celled all foreclosure sales was not only ‘irregular,’ but also illegal, improper and uncon-
scionable.”

Mullen is also suing Ed Montgomery, of MNP1, records show.

Lawyers for Montgomery and the company declined to comment. But in a response to the
lawsuit, they said Mullen defaulted on the loan and knew that MNP1 was foreclosing yet
took no action to prevent it.

‘Everything I owned’

Hankins said he bought a brand new VIBE 268RKS travel trailer on Jan. 19 and financed it
through a Fort Worth company called Sago Financial.

While Hankins was moving the trailer in March, it sustained about $4,700 worth of dam-
age. The insurance company cut a check, and Hankins said he decided to use some of it for
his future trailer payments, “given the uncertainties” associated with the pandemic, his
lawsuit said.

Hankins said he could have had the damage repaired for less money. A dispute arose over
the balance of the insurance payment, which led to the sudden repossession, he said.
“Thankfully, Hankins’ neighbor witnessed the actions of Sago’s repossession agent and
was able to rescue Hankins’ dogs,” the lawsuit said.

When Hankins later went to pick up his property from the trailer with a police escort, he
discovered that his belongings had been damaged. He said it was “everything I owned.”
“His belongings were smashed and scattered throughout the unit, and several items ap-
peared to be stolen,” his lawsuit said.

An attorney for Sago Financial declined to comment.

Auto Finance News reported that Texas and some other states have asked creditors to tem-
porarily cease vehicle repossessions during the pandemic, without taking more restrictive
steps like a moratorium.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200609/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. Facing foreclosure amid crisis

But the Federal Trade Commission has warned that while many lenders have “begun to
voluntarily forgo repossessions” during the pandemic, vehicles could still be taken if con-
sumers got behind on payments — “sometimes without warning.”

How much longer?

An April blog post by the Bradley law firm said some Texas counties like Dallas decided not
to “make county facilities available for sales to proceed.”

“It is unclear as to the authority of a county to refuse to make public facilities available in
contravention of legislation,” the post said, adding that other means like Zoom and Skype
could allow the sales to proceed.

The law firm said the monthly foreclosure auctions are authorized by the Texas Property
Code. The sales are generally held at the courthouse or another location chosen by the
county, the firm said.

“These sales are of particular concern for local officials during a pandemic, as the large
crowds that gather to bid on these properties can number in the hundreds,” the blog post
said.

The Dallas County Sheriff ’s Department, which handles property tax foreclosures, said the
private mortgage company foreclosures are run by an Addisonbased law firm. That firm
did not return phone calls.

Resume in July

The county’s monthly property tax foreclosures, held at the Old Red Courthouse in down-
town Dallas, will resume in July and include properties from the canceled April and May
sales, a sheriff’s spokesman said.

An official with Dallas County Judge Clay Jenkins’ office said Friday she was still trying to
find out when the private mortgage foreclosure auctions will resume. But renters will con-
tinue to get at least a few more days of relief — Jenkins extended the moratorium on evic-
tions to June 15.

“Essentially, people are getting a pass right now,” said Leinart, the local bankruptcy at-
torney.

It’s why bankruptcy filings remain low, he said. But creditors may not be willing to con-
tinue “backing off and not pushing foreclosure and repossession,” he added.

“How long they can financially do that, I don’t know,” Leinart said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200609/page/1/textview 4/4
