2020. 6. 17. THE NATION Border arrests rise

THE NATION Border arrests rise
Uptick in May numbers amid federal emergency immigration restrictions

The Washington Post + 13 Jun 2020 - A1 + BY NICK MIROFF nick.miroff@washpost.com

The number of migrants detained by U.S. authorities at the Mexico border rose 36 percent
in May.

The number of migrants detained by U.S. authorities at the Mexican border rose 36 percent
in May, according to U.S. Customs and Border Protection figures released Friday, a sign
that the deterrent effects of President Trump’s emergency pandemic measures might be
wearing off.

CBP took 23,118 migrants into custody last month, up from 16,966 in April, the figures
show. Border arrests typically rise in late spring as U.S. seasonal labor demands increase,
but last month’s totals were still far below the figures recorded in May 2019, when 144,116
were detained at the peak of last year’s border crisis.

The uptick at the border last month occurred despite the administration’s continued ap-
plication of emergency restrictions that have suspended normal immigration proceedings
and allowed for the rapid “expulsion” of nearly every migrant who crosses into the United
States illegally.

Those emergency health orders, which CBP refers to as Title 42, allowed the agency to ex-
pel 19,707 border crossers last month, including minors and asylum seekers who are no
longer afforded additional legal protections. The Trump administration argues the emer-
gency measures have aided in preventing a wider coronavirus outbreak by limiting the
number of detainees held in cramped border cells.

“Implementation of COVID-19 policies allowed CBP to process and return, in under two
hours, 96 percent of those subject to [ Title 42], dramatically reducing human contact, the
risk of spread, and the strain on U.S. healthcare facilities, helping the United States avert a
public health disaster,” the agency said in a statement Friday.

Since the implementation of the emergency orders in late March, nearly 43,000 migrants
have been subjected to the rapidexpulsion proceedings, according to CBP figures. Once in
U.S. custody, the migrants’ fingerprints and documents are quickly recorded, and they are
driven to the nearest border crossing for delivery to Mexican authorities.

Mexican single adults now account for the largest share of those taken into custody in re-
cent months, in contrast to last year’s historic border surge, which was driven primarily by
Central American families.

According to CBP data, 82 percent of migrants encountered by the agency last month were
Mexican nationals, while just 13 percent were from Central America’s Northern Triangle
nations of Guatemala, Honduras and El Salvador. A year earlier, those numbers were al-
most the reverse: 72 percent of detainees were from the Northern Triangle and 16 percent
from Mexico.

Mexican nationals typically comprise the largest share of U.S. deportees, and some of those
arrested by border agents each month are longtime U.S. residents attempting to return to

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200613/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. THE NATION Border arrests rise

jobs and families on the U.S. side.

The American Civil Liberties Union filed a lawsuit against the Trump administration this
week in the District of Columbia on behalf of a 16-year-old Honduran asylum seeker at-
tempting to reunite with his father in the United States.

The lawsuit contends that the Trump administration has exceeded its authority under Title
42. and cannot disregard protections granted to minors, asylum seekers and other vulnera-
ble groups under U.S. law.

“The Administration’s use of Title 42 is a transparent end-run around Congress’s consid-
ered decision to provide protection to children and others fleeing danger even where com-
municable disease is a concern — and to address that concern through the use of testing
and quarantines, not deportations,” the ACLU argued in its complaint.

Trump has extended the emergency restrictions at the border indefinitely, in addition to
issuing an executive order blocking several categories of visa applicants from seeking
green cards overseas. White House officials are debating a second executive order that
could freeze nonimmigrant work visas for up to six months, according to two administra-
tion officials who were not authorized to comment publicly, but a final decision on the
scope of that decree has not been made.

Trump’s emergency restrictions have all but closed the United States to border crossers
fleeing persecution, records show. The Justice and Homeland Security departments pro-
posed regulations this week that would make it even more difficult for applicants to qualify
for protection, with a new series of legal and administrative hurdles, while giving the gov-
ernment more latitude to dismiss their claims and order deportations.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200613/page/1/textview 2/2
