2020. 6. 17. A momentary pause in Atlanta Cleanup volunteers do what they can before the unrest reignites.

A momentary pause in Atlanta Cleanup volunteers do what
they can before the unrest reignites.

Black volunteers try to fix what they can before the anger boils up again

The Washington Post - 2 Jun 2020 - A1 - BY STEPHANIE MCCRUMMEN stephanie.mccrummen@washpost.com

ATLANTA — It was the morning after another night of protest and violence in downtown
Atlanta, and here came the men from Morehouse College, from the Masonic lodge and
Kappa Alpha Psi and other African American fraternities, to clean up what had been done.
Isaac Robinson, 47, picked up a rock off the sidewalk.

b, =.
i —_—_—

    

“This will not be a projectile this evening,” he said, dropping it in a garbage bag.

Corey Shakelford, 50, picked up a piece of glass and looked around at the smashed store-
fronts and fresh graffiti and shook his head.

“Look at our home,” he said. “Look at our city.”

They stopped for a moment Sunday so they could absorb the full heartbreak of what their
beloved city had become. Then they continued along Marietta Street, more than two dozen
black men who felt all the rage that has set off nationwide protests after the death of Ge-
orge Floyd in police custody, and all the indignation expressed by Atlanta Mayor Keisha
Lance Bottoms (D), who had stood the day before with rappers Killer Mike and T.I. and told
those doing the damage: “We are better than this. ... When you are burning down this city,
you are burning down our community.”

Now Seth Gholston, 35, swept glass near Centennial Park. Robinson flipped upright an or-
ange construction barrel. Shakelford picked up a discarded water bottle, and they all kept
going, talking about what they were going to teach their children about the world that had
brought all of this about.

“Now it’s every situation I have to warn them against,” Gholston said.

“It’s a different climate right now,” said Robinson.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200602/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. A momentary pause in Atlanta Cleanup volunteers do what they can before the unrest reignites.

“You know what my son said to me yesterday?” Shakelford said. “We were coming back
from McDonald’s. He said, ‘Daddy, that George guy — what if that happened to me?’ Ten
years old. I said, ‘Son, it won’t happen to you, because I’m giving you the lessons on how
to be black in America.’ ”

“It’s another level of citizenship,” said Carey Gaines, 47.

They walked by a parking garage where graffiti read “F--- Killer Mike” and “F--- T.I.”
and “KKKeisha” and “F--- 12,” an anti-police slogan.

“That’s agitation right there,” Robinson said.

“That hurts,” said Shakelford. They pressed on, picking up milk bottles and more glass
and a discarded “No Justice No Peace” sign as a woman driving by rolled down her window
and yelled out “Thank you, guys!” and a man driving by yelled out: “That’s what I’m
talking about! That’s it!”

“See? That’s Atlanta,” said Robinson, proud of the Atlanta he was a part of — the profes-
sional Atlanta, the prosperous one, the Atlanta that earned the title “the Black Mecca” as it
became the center of black middle- and upper-class success and leadership in the United
States.

“When everything else goes away, when you don’t get treated right in New York, when you
don’t treated right in L.A., when you can’t get treated right in Detroit or Alabama, Atlanta
has been here for us,” T.I. had said after the first night of unrest. “We can’t do this here.
This is sacred.”

“Let’s walk this way and up,” Robinson said now.

They passed two security guards in front of bank with smashed -out windows.

“How you doing today, sir?” Robinson said.

“All right,” said the guard. “You all keep it tight,” Robinson said.

They came upon the statue of Henry Grady, an influential editor and staunch segregation-
ist who coined the phrase “the New South” after the Civil War, now sprayed with “KKK.”
“Look what they did to Grady,” Robinson said. “Well, at least that’s historically accurate.”
They moved on, past a smashed Starbucks, past more graffiti and past a cellphone repair
shop and a State Farm insurance office and stopped to read the handwritten plea on a sheet
of ripped-out notebook paper taped to the window: “We are black owned. State Farm too.”
“Man,” Gaines said.

They walked on, and when they saw another group of people cleaning up, Robinson called
out to them: “We’ve already canvassed this area, but we haven’t gone that way! We
haven’t gone north!” And they continued past a boarded-up coffee shop and smashed
restaurants and stores.

“I got my first pair of shoes I ever purchased there,” Gaines said, pointing out one of them.
“From my little summer job. They were real cheap. Smelled like diesel fuel, but I was so
proud.”

They passed the Rialto theater, now boarded up and spray-painted with “F--- N.”

“We used to come here and watch Bruce Lee movies,” Gaines said.

They picked up some more water bottles, more glass and more signs, and now it was al-
most noon, and they gathered for a photo on the steps of a Georgia State University build-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200602/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. A momentary pause in Atlanta Cleanup volunteers do what they can before the unrest reignites.

ing, four rows of smiling men trying to keep their city together, and then Shakelford dis-
missed the group with a prayer for the evening to come.

“Lord, we ask you to watch over every house and bring peace to the family,” he said.

Five hours later, police helicopters were circling the blue sky above downtown Atlanta. Na-
tional Guard officers in camouflage were standing in the bushes along Centennial Park,
and soon hundreds of mostly young protesters began arriving, chanting “No justice, no
Peace, no racist police!” and “Hands up! Don’t shoot!” and waving handwritten signs that
read “Let’s change the world!” and “Love” and “We have every right to destroy what we
built.”

Cars honked in support. The protesters chanted: “Whose streets? Our streets!” Someone
knocked over an orange construction barrel, and after a few laps around the park they con-
verged on the place that had been cleaned for them that morning, clustering on Marietta
Street in front of a long row of police with riot helmets and shields.

“Keep it peaceful! Keep it peaceful!” a woman yelled as they pushed right up to the police
line.

Toward the back, a young woman held up a sign that read, “This thug is getting her PHD.”
“T’ve been crying all week — I’ve got three brothers,” said Nettie Brown, 23, who was
working on her PHD in biomedical engineering. “But we cannot destroy this city. We have
to spread the love.”

At the front, a young man stared at the officers for a few minutes, trying to contain himself
until he started yelling “F--them! F--- them!” and a woman put her arm around him and
led him to the back, and for a while, that’s how it went.

When a young woman started yelling “I’m so tired of it! I’m so tired of it!” another woman
put her arm around her shoulders and led her to the back, saying to her: “They’re listen-
ing. They’re listening.”

When a young Latino man started crying and yelling “What’s the solution?!” his friend led
him to the back, saying: “This is the first step. We’re taking the first step.”

When a young black man started yelling “F--- the police!” a 58-year-old black woman
wearing a mask made her way to the front, saying “Let me in here” until she reached the
young man and put her arm around him and said, “Do not engage, do not engage,” and the
young man started to cry.

“Not all police are bad, you hear me?” she said, trying to calm him down. “You give them a
chance. They are not your enemy. This is not about the police, baby. This is bigger than the
police. We’ve been at this a long time, and I came down here for you, you hear me? I love
you. I love you.”

He was quiet and crying, but after a few minutes he was yelling again, and now a priest
wearing a wooden cross was holding up his arms in front of the crowd. Another young man
was walking up and down the front lines yelling “Do not throw anything! Do not throw
anything!” and as the sun began to go down, most of the protesters headed home, and the
smell of marijuana came, and someone arrived with a speaker blasting “Fight the Power”
and a young woman yelled “We built this s--and we can destroy it!”

Someone lit one firecracker. Someone else lit another.

Someone hurled a water bottle at the police line.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200602/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. A momentary pause in Atlanta Cleanup volunteers do what they can before the unrest reignites.

Someone threw a bottle of milk, and someone tossed a roll of toilet paper, and as the 9 p.m.
curfew arrived, the police fired tear gas, and the riot police arrived with batons, and the
National Guard took up positions, and the protesters began scattering, and now here came
police cars and military trucks, rolling down Marietta Street where the men from More-
house College, from the Masonic lodge and Kappa Alpha Psi and other African American
fraternities had cleaned and talked and prayed.

“You know what my son said to me? ... ‘Daddy, that George guy — what if that happened
to me?’ ” Corey Shakelford, 50

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200602/page/1/textview 4/4
