2020. 6. 17. Trump lashes out at China, orders action on Hong Kong

Trump lashes out at China, orders action on Hong Kong

The Washington Post - 30 May 2020 - A1 - BY DAVID J. LYNCH AND EMILY RAUHALA

President Trump on Friday leveled an extraordinary broadside at the Chinese government,
accusing it of a comprehensive “pattern of misconduct” and ordering U.S. officials to begin
the process of revoking Hong Kong’s special status under USS. law.

: *

   

The president did not outline a deadline for the historic action. But if carried out, it would
mean that the United States would no longer treat Hong Kong and China as separate enti-
ties for the purposes of extradition, customs, trade and visa issues, he said. And the an-
nouncement could include sanctions on Hong Kong or Chinese officials.

In Rose Garden remarks, Trump alleged that the Chinese government covered up the coro-
navirus outbreak and instigated “a global pandemic that has cost

more than 100,000 American lives and over 1 million lives worldwide.” The president also
attacked the World Health Organization as effectively controlled by Beijing.

“We will today be terminating our relationship” with the WHO, the president said, adding
that the organization’s more than $400 million annual U.S. contribution will be diverted to
other health groups.

The president later issued a proclamation to protect sensitive American university re-
search from Chinese spying and to bar an unspecified number of Chinese nationals from
entering the United States for graduate study. He also directed an administration working
group headed by Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin to evaluate Chinese corporations
listed on U.S. financial markets as potential targets of future restrictions.

The moves seemed certain to intensify growing U.S.- China tensions, though investors on
Friday took them in stride.

The president’s comments were as notable for what he did not say. There was no mention
of his irritation with China’s failure to quickly increase purchases of American goods as re-
quired by the trade deal he signed in January. He also made no direct reference to Chinese
President Xi Jinping, even as he said that “the world is now suffering as a result of the
malfeasance of the Chinese government.”

In one sign of Trump’s increased fury with the world’s second-largest economy, on Friday
morning he tweeted simply: “CHINA!”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200530/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Trump lashes out at China, orders action on Hong Kong

His formal Friday announcement — while long on harsh rhetoric — was short on details.
The president reiterated some familiar grievances, blaming the Chinese for stealing Amer-
ican trade secrets and jobs and assailing his predecessors for allegedly letting them get
away with it.

He expanded his indictment of the Chinese government to include its program of island
construction in the South China Sea, a national security concern he rarely addresses.

“The Chinese government has continually violated its promises to us and so many na-
tions,” he said.

Trump also stopped short of taking concrete action against the U.s.-listed Chinese compa-
nies he said posed “hidden and undue risks” for American investors. The Securities and
Exchange Commission and other regulators have complained for years about China’s re-
fusal to grant access to their companies’ audit records.

As of last year, 156 Chinese companies — including 11 with significant government owner-
ship — traded on U.S. markets, according to the U.S.- China Economic and Security Review
Commission, a nonpartisan congressional body.

After Trump’s remarks, Senate Minority Leader Charles E. Schumer (D-N.Y.) suggested the
president was trying to use China to distract from the pandemic and battered economy.
“President Trump’s Rose Garden event just now was pathetic,” he said. “It perfectly en-
capsulates his inability to lead when our nation needs it most. The only question is
whether President Trump is afraid to lead or just doesn’t know how.”

Trump’s announcement followed Secretary of State Mike Pompeo’s statement earlier this
week that Hong Kong was no longer sufficiently autonomous from mainland China to de-
serve separate treatment. Under the 1997 handover agreement with the United Kingdom,
China agreed to preserve the former British colony’s democratic system for 50 years. Xi’s
decision to impose security legislation on Hong Kong directly rather than by working
through the territory’s local legislature may mark the collapse of that “one country, two
systems” approach.

Some advocates of a tougher U.S. approach to China were disappointed by the president’s
10minute statement.

“They didn’t do anything with regard to Hong Kong. His Hong Kong comments could have
been issued as a statement a week ago,” said Derek Scissors, a China specialist at the
American Enterprise Institute. “The administration has absolutely considered specific ac-
tions since the [National People’s Congress] proposal was made public, but decided not to
announce a single one.”

Caught in the middle of the deepening U.S.- China dispute are more than 1,350 U.S. corpo-
rations with offices in Hong Kong. The erosion of the city’s freedoms, including an inde-
pendent judiciary, threatens to turn one of the global economy’s financial centers into just
another Chinese city and calls into question the rationale for such a sizable commercial
presence there.

The National People’s Congress, China’s rubber-stamp legislature, on Thursday approved
a plan to impose national security legislation in Hong Kong. The move was denounced ina
joint statement by the United States, Canada, Australia and Britain as in “direct conflict”
with China’s promises in 1997 when it regained sovereignty over the British colony.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200530/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Trump lashes out at China, orders action on Hong Kong

“The United States may well have to do something the market doesn’t like in light of its
longerterm interests,” said Patrick Chovanec, economic adviser for Silvercrest Asset Man-
agement in New York. “But there is concern about whether the U.S. is in a spiral of escala-
tion with China on several fronts.”

The president’s visa move targets Chinese graduate students in the United States who have
worked, studied, or been employed by entities linked to China’s efforts to “acquire or di-
vert” technology for the People’s Liberation Army.

It is not immediately clear how many of the 350,000 Chinese students in the United States
will be affected. And the announcement is expected to draw strong pushback from U.S.
universities; some are heavily reliant on the full-fee tuition payments from Chinese stu-
dents.

Over a 10-year period, the People’s Liberation Army dispatched 2,500 scientists and engi-
neers to study overseas, focusing on democracies like the United States, according to a
2018 report by the Australian Strategic Policy Institute, a nonpartisan think tank.

In January, the FBI arrested a 29-year-old Boston University student, accusing her of fail-
ing to disclose on her visa application that she was a lieutenant in the PLA.

Friday’s action represents only the administration’s latest slap at Beijing. The president
earlier this month pushed a federal retirement pension board to abandon plans to invest in
Chinese securities. And the Commerce Department tightened limits on Chinese telecom gi-
ant Huawei’s ability to purchase American computer chips.

Just four months after Trump celebrated a partial trade deal with China, marking an ap-
parent truce in a two-year diplomatic conflict, relations between the two countries have
plummeted. The president has been openly displeased with China’s failure to quickly fulfill
the trade deal’s terms, including massive additional purchases of American crops, energy
products and manufactured goods.

Trump’s decision to “terminate” the United States’ relationship with the World Health
Organization comes after repeated threats to act.

Of the $893 million the United States sent in the 2018 and 2019 funding period, $237 mil-
lion was an “assessed contribution” — a type of membership fee that may prove hard to
cut without congressional approval.

At greater risk is what’s known as the “voluntary contribution,” money provided to U.S.
agencies for health efforts and then given to WHO programs. The biggest share of this
money goes to polio eradication, with large chunks to fight vaccine-preventable disease,
malaria, tuberculosis, HIV/AIDS and the provision of basic health care.

The prospect of cutting U.S. funding for public health issues like polio in the middle of the
pandemic drew immediate fire. Patrice Harris, president of the American Medical Associa-
tion, said the action “serves no logical purpose and makes finding a way out of this public
health crisis dramatically more challenging.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200530/page/1/textview 3/3
