2020. 6. 17. Do they have a deal for you!

Do they have a deal for you!
It’s asummer of incentives as dealers try to lure back buyers, clear lots

The Dallas Moming News - 14 Jun 2020 - 1A. By ASHTON NICHOLS Staff Writer ashton.nichols@dallasnews.com

This summer, auto dealers are going out of their way to get your business.

   

During the height of the pandemic’s economic shutdown, automakers were quick out of the gate
with empathetic TV ads offering to defer loan payments for those suddenly out of work.
Then, as states began to lift lockdown orders and reopen economies, dealerships rolled out enticing
deals never before seen in the industry in an effort to bring buyers back into showrooms. Some dan-
gled zerointerestrate loans stretched out over seven years.

Now, heading into the summer, the incentives aren’t likely to go away as auto dealers race to clear
out inventory that’s been idling on their lots for months. They’re now touting loan deals such as 0%
interest for five or six years.

Jerry Reynolds, who cohosts a nationally syndicated radio program on autos that airs on WBAP (820
AM) in

DallasFort Worth, said he’s even seen extra rebates and lease specials on top of the zerointerest of-
fers.

Auto dealers “really covered their bases,” he said. “No matter how you buy a car, they had an incen-
tive.”

With vehicle sales crashing in April before recovering slightly in May, buyers can expect a summer
selling season filled with offers, since last year’s models aren’t expected to be replaced with this
year’s until August. Most of the incentives are on last year’s models.

Six and sevenyear loans are lengthy, even at 0% interest, for what’s typically one of the largest pur-
chases consumers make. But it is encouraging more people to buy new cars, or even the car of their
https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 4/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Do they have a deal for you!

dreams when they normally wouldn’t, Reynolds said.

So what drives manufacturers and dealers to turn to incentives as a way to draw hesitant buyers off
the sidelines? Most of the time, it’s because there is excess inventory. When consumers stop buying
cars — as they did during COVID19 — dealerships don’t place new orders from manufacturers be-
cause their lots are full.

Three months after the incentives began, many car dealerships are seeing the opposite effect:
They’re low on inventory now since no new orders were placed in early March. That should level out
around August, Reynolds said.

“1 think we'll go back to big incentives,” he said. “We’re really at a lull right now. For June and July,
incentives are there, but they’re not as good as they’re gonna be.”

Nationally, about 1.3 million cars were sold in February, but that dropped to 975,000 in March. Sales
hit “rock bottom” in April, falling to about 700,000, said Brad Korner, general manager of Cox Au-
tomotive Rates and Incentives.

Dealers’ lots have their lowest inventory volume in the past 18 months. At the start of June, there
were 2.6 million new vehicles for sale in the U.S., according to a Cox Automotive data analysis.

Ford sold only 450,000 cars and trucks in April, a 66% drop compared with the same month last
year. Automakers’ revenue in the U.S. could shrink by about $100 billion this year if consumer de-
mand doesn’t bounce back, according to a Bloomberg Intelligence report.

Light trucks made up 89% of combined U.S. sales for Fiat Chrysler, Ford and General Motors in the
first three months of this year, the report said. Pickups represented 36% of that total.

“It’s all about trucks,” Reynolds said. “Big SUVs have done really well.”

He recommended that anyone looking to buy a car should do so in the next 60 days, especially those
eyeing big SUVs. He said he’s seeing high demand for Chevy Suburbans and Tahoes, both made at
GM’s Arlington assembly plant, and Ford Expeditions.

The average age of vehicles on North Texas roads is nearly 11 years, said Brent Franks, president of
the North Texas Automobile Dealers Association, which includes 200 dealerships. Cars and trucks
loaded with improved technology are lasting longer, encouraging people to trade in less frequently.
That’s another reason dealers are upping their game on incentives.

Some are going as far as giving buyers 90 days before requiring a first loan payment, said Hesham
Elgaghil, chief strategy officer at Park Place Dealerships, which has 12 locations selling 18 brands.
Others are making it easier to terminate leases early.

“There’s a host of really, really attractive and favorable programs,” Elgaghil said. “We try to partner
with the leadership from the brands that we represent and try to brainstorm with them on what
would be a really attractive consumer offering.”

About 1.1 million cars were sold nationally in May, down 30.2% from a year ago, according to an es-
timate from Cox Automotive and Kelley Blue Book. Cox Automotive described it as the industry’s
worst May since the Great Recession.

But on the bright side, May’s sales totals were up 57% from the month before.

Park Place’s sales of used vehicles were up 5% yearoveryear in May, Elgaghil said, but new car sales
were down 15%. He said he expects new car sales to pick up when supply increases.

Mercedes, Porsche and Volvo SUVs are among Park Place’s top sellers, said spokeswoman Carolyn
Alvey.

“1 think that for the next 90 days, perhaps people are doing less air travel and they’re getting SUVs
for those road trips,” Elgaghil said.

Ray Huffines, CEO of the nine Huffines Auto Dealerships in DallasFort Worth, said his dealerships
saw record used car sales in May after being way down the month before.

Automakers’ aggressive zerointerestrate loans are helping to motivate buyers, said Huffines, third-
generation owner of the family business that started in 1924.
https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200614/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Do they have a deal for you!

“1 believe it’s working very well,” he said. “That is a very, very lucrative incentive for consumers.”
Some manufacturers also have partnered with retailers to sweeten the deals even more. Costco is of-
fering its members $500 to $1,250 in shopping cards if they buy or lease certain Chevrolet, Honda,
Volvo or MercedesBenz models.

COVID19inspired incentives remind Reynolds of the post9/11 deals that introduced American buyers
to 0% financing for five years.

“Dealers were just completely shut down [then], but for the ones that were open, business was very
difficult,” he said. “Manufacturers started pouring incentives on, and by the time they rolled
around, they were the biggest I’ve ever seen in a 35year career.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200614/page/1/textview 3/3
