2020. 6. 18. McLoud man to stay locked up

McLoud man to stay locked up

The Oklahoman « 11 Jun 2020 - A1 -: By Nolan Clay Staff writer nclay@oklahoman.com

A judge Wednesday ruled aMc Loud man will stay jailed until trial because he is a potential
danger to the community.

 

Christopher Steven Ledbetter, 29, is accused in Oklahoma City federal court of illegally
possessing a fully automated machine gun.

His supporters say t he Marine veteran is a peaceful man, who has been targeted because
he stood up for his family in their ongoing dispute with McLoud police. More than a dozen
rallied outside the courthouse Wednesday morning to call for his freedom. Some carried
flags.

“This isa travesty of justice ,” his mother, Jo ann Johnson, said.

U.S. Magistrate Judge Suzanne Mitchell decided against releasing Ledbetter under strict
conditions after watching a video of him refusing to pull over for McLoud police in May.
In the video, he drives home instead and can be heard loading a gun in the vehicle. He asks
his mother in a phone call to tell his stepfather “to get the guns ready.”

The judge also pointed to his “flagrant” confrontation with the McLoud police chief in Fe-
bruary and to a speech he gave outside the Oklahoma Capitol in May.

In the five-minute speech, he talked of fighting

with the Kurds against ISIS after leaving the Marines. He ended with a declaration that he
would not follow any laws “against peaceful freedom.”

“Tf they do enforce it, I will use all of these weapons and al 1 of t he banned weapons for
their intended purpose of killing terrorists, foreign and domestic. And I will do the same
here as the terrorists that I killed foreign,” he said. “Liberty or death!”

The judge said Ledbetter's spiraling conduct gave her gr e at c oncerns. She commented
that there would be no order if citizens were allowed to not follow the | aws they disagreed
with.

Ledbetter became upset with McLoud police after an

officer supposedly used the family' s trash canon their property in Lincoln County without
permission. The officer and his mother had a confrontation in February about it after the
officer stopped Ledbetter's sister.

The officer was | ater fired, according to testimony at the hearing.

Ledbetter also was upset because he believed police were covering up an officer's inappro-
priate sexual relationship with a female student at

McLoud Public Schools, his attorney told the judge. The student was described as a family
friend.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/2020061 1/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. McLoud man to stay locked up

“He committed the ‘crime' of contempt of cop and that is why he has the federal govern-
ment after him today ,” attorney Michael Johnson said.

The attorney compared Ledbetter to the millions protesting “bad cops” across the nation
in the wake of the death in Minnesota of George Floyd.

The FBI arrested Ledbetter on Thursday on a state warrant of eluding police and searched
his family's property. Authorities have called t he property a compound. Led better lived on
the property in a large shipping container described by the FBI as a barracks. On top of the
container were sandbags and camouflage netting.

Ledbetter admitted after his arrest that he possessed

“an illegal select fire AK-47style carbine,” according to the FBI. He said he had modified it
himself to fire in a fully automatic mode. The FBI recovered it from his Jeep.

“He said several times that he knew it was illegal,” special agent Joshua Rich testified at
the hearing.

In the search of the family property last week, the FBI found two homemade grenades and
two Molotov cocktails, according to the testimony.

A former girlfriend told the FBI that Ledbetter had talked during a vacation together in
Arkansas about how fun it would be to go pig hunting, according to the testimony. “She
said he meant police,” the special agent told the judge.

The FBI is continuing to investigate others involved with Ledbetter in an organization
called Sons of Liberty.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/2020061 1/page/1/textview 2/2
