2020. 6. 17. Pandemic deepens pain for Trump Organization

Pandemic deepens pain for Trump Organization

The Washington Post : 13 Jun 2020 - A1 . BY JOSHUA PARTLOW, DAVID A. FAHRENTHOLD AND JONATHAN O’CON-
NELL

The head of President Trump’s flagship hotel stood on Pennsylvania Avenue with a mask

on and two thumbs up.
my |

   

After three brutal months of empty hotel rooms and a skeleton staff, Mickael Damelincourt
finally had something to celebrate: new sidewalk seating to safely welcome back Trump’s
MAGAloving customers. “Let’s get back to work,” Damelincourt tweeted on May 28.

By the next day, Trump was in his underground bunker, protesters swarmed downtown
Washington cursing Trump’s name, and the hotel’s outdoor seating experiment was
tabled.

The whiplash at Trump’s D.C. hotel is emblematic of the problems faced by his company,
which was already suffering from a tarnished brand before the novel coronavirus hit. The
fresh wave of political anger directed toward Trump complicates an already difficult re-
covery for the company.

Interviews with current and former Trump Organization employees and tenants, and
emails obtained by The Washington Post,

show the pandemic in particular has rattled operations at the company. With thousands of
Trump’s hotel rooms empty, the company laid off or furloughed more than 2,800 employ-
ees and scoured for even the smallest savings. It eliminated flowers, chocolates and news-
papers at its New York hotel and turned off lights in common areas in its Chicago hotel to
save on electricity, according to letters that hotel management sent to investors.

“This was not just a step down,” Eric Danziger, the chief executive of Trump Hotels, told
board members of Trump’s Chicago hotel on April 22, according to an account of his phone
call obtained by The Post. “This was a steep dive.”

Trump’s business struggles present a potential conflict as he tries as president to manage
a pandemic that has already claimed more than 110,000 American lives. The outbreak has
devastated industries at the core of Trump’s business — travel, luxury tourism and hospi-
tality — and the company’s fortunes largely depend on people’s willingness to travel and
ability to gather in large groups.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200613/page/1/textview 115
2020. 6. 17. Pandemic deepens pain for Trump Organization

Trump has handed day-to-day operations of the company to his eldest sons. Eric Trump
did not respond to multiple requests for comment before this story’s publication. After this
story published Friday, he tweeted that the company “had one of the BEST years in the
HISTORY of the Organization in 2019” and that the details would be available in the presi-
dent’s personal financial disclosure, likely to be made public later this month. He accused
The Post of trying to harass the president and the company. “We have very little debt,
tremendous cash flow & some of the greatest properties on earth, which have never been
better, & are winning every accolade & award.”

The damage of the past months appears extensive. Out of Trump’s five top-earning hotels
and resorts, four of them — in Miami, Las Vegas, Scotland and Ireland — shut down in
March and remained closed through May. An analysis by The Post of Trump Organization
revenue, based on Trump’s latest public financial disclosure, which covers 2018, indicates
Trump probably lost out on tens of millions of dollars in revenue over the past three
months.

Even before the pandemic, Trump’s polarizing presidency had sapped revenue from his
business. At least two of Trump’s U.S. hotels — in Chicago and Miami — had reported
sharp declines in business after Trump entered politics. The company’s hotel in Washing-
ton is now up for sale.

More recently, protesters have denounced Trump outside his New York, Washington and
California properties, hurling invectives at these physical symbols of his presidency. At
Trump’s golf course in Jupiter, Fla., the 18-yearold son of a former Republican congress-
man was arrested and accused of spray-painting “B.L.M.” — an abbreviation for Black
Lives Matter — on the entrance sign.

But along with the rest of the country, the Trump Organization has begun opening back up.
Members can visit Mar-a-lago, but only the beach club. Golfers can step out onto Trump’s
course along the Potomac River, and some, like him, even do so without a mask.

Eric Trump tweeted Wednesday that Trump’s Doral resort in

Florida — the company’s highestearning hotel — will be reopening next week. President
Trump quickly chimed in on Twitter about this financial burden: “And the Trump family
didn’t ask the Federal government for money to carry this and many other very expensive
to carry properties!”

Because it is owned by the president, the Trump Organization was excluded from portions
of federal relief funding.

One former Trump Organization executive said the company should get out of the hotel
business, which accounts for about a third of company revenue.

“They have too many rooms to fill in a market where demand has suffered,” the former
executive said on the condition of anonymity to discuss the company’s private financial
situation. “He is too divisive a character in Chicago and NYC. In any market one wants to be
neutral — he leaves many potential guests bitter and hostile.”

The picture is not all dire. The Trump Organization receives licensing and management
fees for some Trump-branded properties that are owned by others, and there is no indica-
tion those fees have been disrupted. The company so far appears to have met its financial
obligations even while seeking relief from creditors.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200613/page/1/textview 2/5
2020. 6. 17. Pandemic deepens pain for Trump Organization

In late March, Trump’s golf club in Pine Hill, N. J. — which pays a monthly fee of $20,833
to use town-owned land — told the town it “may not be in a position to make [the pay-
ment] for a minimum of 120 days,” according to an email obtained via public-records re-
quest. But the next day, the club reversed itself and paid the fee, other emails said.

Some former employees expect the company to weather the current difficulties because
Trump owns an array of major real estate assets and has fans to patronize his properties.
“I think he’s going to be fine,” said one former Trump employee who spoke on the condi-
tion of anonymity to discuss a former boss. “If you own all these things outright, it’s going
to be a lot easier to get through it.”

And yet, the current crisis is now affecting even the strongest parts of the Trump business
portfolio. The office buildings in New York and California that Trump owns wholly or in
part are considered more insulated from politics than his hotels and clubs because they are
leased to corporate tenants, and some buildings don’t use Trump’s name.

One of the tenants in Trumpowned buildings that is almost certainly asking to pay less is
Starbucks, which wrote to its thousands of landlords May 5 asking for a year’s worth of re-
duced rent beginning June 1. The coffee chain rents space at Trump Tower in New York and
at Trump’s D.C. hotel. In Washington, Starbucks pays Trump $14,118 per month, increas-
ing to $15,787 a month in 2023, according to Trump Organization documents obtained by
The Post.

“We are having ongoing conversations with our landlords in various markets regarding
what may be commercially reasonable lease concessions in the current environment,”
Starbucks Chief Financial Officer Pat Grismer told investors in April. Starbucks spokespeo-
ple didn’t respond to multiple requests for comment about rent negotiations at the Trump
properties.

Other Trump tenants are now facing their own difficulties.

A massive Italian restaurant had been scheduled to open later this summer on the ground
floor of a Wall Street skyscraper owned by Trump. But instead, as the coronavirus spreads,
Nero.lab’s Italian Food Zone will probably have to adjust its initial concept — an 18,000-
square-foot food hall where diners were to share communal tables and wait in lines for
gelato and espresso. The Romebased company’s chief executive, Alfredo Polizzi, remains
optimistic about future prospects at 40 Wall Street. But he knows the restaurant won’t
open until next year.

“We surely would’ve liked to do it sooner,” Polizzi said in an interview. “But given the sit-
uation, I don’t feel that would be wise.”

Another tenant at 40 Wall Street is Neapolitan Express, which operates pizza restaurants
and food trucks in New York. The company has rented space in the building since 2015,
said owner Max Crespo.

Crespo’s business has cratered — revenue dropped 27 percent in March, 55 percent in
April and 90 percent in May — but he has so far retained all 45 of his employees while also
donating thousands of pizzas to medical personnel and first responders. Just as things
were opening up last month, protests and looting again drove away customers. The 40
Wall Street building got boarded up and spray-painted with anti-trump graffiti, Crespo
said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200613/page/1/textview 3/5
2020. 6. 17. Pandemic deepens pain for Trump Organization

“Our city’s on its knees right now,” said Crespo, 47, a lifelong New Yorker. “This is the
worst I’ve ever seen it.”

Crespo said the Trump Organization collected full rent the past three months but also that
Trump Organization employees have been “good partners” who “said if we have any
problems going forward they can work with us.”

He pays the Trump Organization more than $20,000 per month but hopes to renegotiate
and expects many restaurants across New York will not be able to continue operating at
current rents.

“Obviously, I’m going to go and ask for a reduction in rent,” he said. “I’m sure they would
work with us.”

Trump’s business is particularly positioned to suffer from this pandemic. The luxury
tourism and leisure sector that the Trump Organization inhabits has been devastated over
the past two months as travel plummeted, international borders closed, and events and
conferences evaporated.

Even when stay-at-home orders end and more people return to work, hotel operators and
office building owners face tremendous uncertainty about how their businesses will re-
cover. Hotels in the United States lost 82 percent of their business for April compared with
the same month last year, according to hotel data analysis firm STR. Luxury hotels saw
their businesses wiped out almost completely, losing 96.6 percent of their business in
April after taking in just $60 million in revenue nationwide.

Analysts also expect the hotel industry to be one of the last sectors to recover given peo-
ple’s aversion to travel during the pandemic.

Hotel experts predict the corporate meetings-and-events sector will be particularly slow
to recover.

“T have no idea what corporate group [travel] looks like in a sixfoot world,” said Jan Fre-
itag, a senior vice president at STR.

Buffets? Open bars? Networking events? he said.

“There is corporate group demand that likely will not come back for four or five years,” he
said.

This has meant layoffs on a large scale for Trump’s employees, with the steepest cuts at
the hotels. Twelve Trump Organization properties in the United States and Canada laid off
or furloughed employees, including cooks, waiters, housekeepers and valets, according to
local filings.

Some of the job losses will not be temporary: At Doral, the company initially furloughed
560 employees, then later said in a filing that 250 of those jobs would be permanent lay-
offs.

Danziger, the chief executive of Trump Hotels, said in his call that the company could be-
gin shifting toward using more part-time employees, who are not entitled to health bene-
fits.

Even before the pandemic, there were signs that Trump’s politics drove away some poten-
tial customers.

“The vibe I got was that half of the guests wouldn’t feel comfortable ever coming to a
meeting there,” said a former employee at Trump’s D.C. hotel who was involved in book-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200613/page/1/textview 4/5
2020. 6. 17. Pandemic deepens pain for Trump Organization

ing conferences. Some hurdles can be overcome with good salesmanship, the former
staffer said, but “this wasn’t overcome-able.”

The staffer, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to preserve relationships in the hotel
industry, was laid off last year because of lack of business.

The pandemic eliminated months of events across Trump’s company. At Doral, at least 10
events this year have been canceled or postponed, according to the groups planning the
events.

Trump’s Mar-a-lago Club was forced to shut down in late March, missing the last month
of Palm Beach’s traditional winter social season. The club reopened its poolside Beach Club
in mid-may, but with restrictions: The number of diners was limited, congregating was
prohibited, and the club warned that “social distancing will be enforced” even in the
Jacuzzi.

The club said it would now stay open a month longer than usual, to the end of June. One
member, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss the private club, told The
Post that he planned to stay away anyway.

At the D.C. hotel, the patio seating plan was scheduled to restart again Friday. A previous
attempt for outdoor tables earlier in Trump’s presidency ended after pedestrians regularly
insulted hotel guests and staff, former employees said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200613/page/1/textview 5/5
