2020. 6. 16. Italy: With new rules, Catholics return to Mass.

Italy: With new rules, Catholics return to Mass.

The Washington Post - 25 May 2020 - A1 - BY CHICO HARLAN AND STEFANO PITRELLI chico.harlan@washpost.com
stefano.pitrelli@washpost.com

ROME — One person after the next filed into the church Sunday morning, walking past a
sign at the entrance that noted masks were mandatory and stopping at a hand sanitizer
dispenser they were obligated to use. Then they took their seats — two to a pew, instead of
the usual four or five. By 10:30 a.m., the church was nearly filled to its new, reduced capac-
ity of 98.

   
 

 

= : i « '~ % Le | —_
\ ee eee Mica
Bee Sink A, NA!

“Welcome back after so much time,” the Rev. Massimo Brogi said to the faithful at the
Church of Santa Maria in Transpontina. “It’s a pleasure to see you again after so much dis-
tance.”

Italy’s Catholics, emerging from one of the most rigid lockdowns in the West — one that
brought a historic halt to religious ceremonies — returned to Mass on Sunday, praying as
they always have while also trying to understand a lengthy list of new rules.

Priests across the country filled their homilies with references to the past three months:
the more than 30,000 who have died of the coronavirus, the passage of so many people
without funerals, the economic suffering.

But the day was a trial run for all the ways in which religious services will look different,
perhaps for months to come, in one of the world’s most Catholic countries.

At Brogi’s church, just blocks from the Vatican, there were no prayer leaflets, no choir.
Pews were spaced 51/ feet apart. When

2. it came time for a prayer, Brogi told parishioners to speak forcefully, “because masks
will dampen your voice.”

Across Rome, church bells rang out all morning. People had been permitted to attend Mass
in person since Monday, but for many, Sunday was their first time back. At the Vatican,
Pope Francis still held Mass in private — a livestreamed event — but he later appeared ina
window overlooking St. Peter’s Square to wave to and bless a trickle of people in the piazza.
Italy’s eight-week, stop-nearly-everything lockdown has helped slow the spread of the
virus. But even for those people going to and from church on Sunday, there were indica-
tions everywhere that things remain far from normal. In Rome, tourist-dependent restau-
rants and stores were still shuttered, with signs on some demanding assistance from the

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200525/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 16. Italy: With new rules, Catholics return to Mass.

Italian government. The broad, colonnade-lined street leading to St. Peter’s — designed
on the orders of Mussolini — remained bereft of the usual religious pilgrims. Instead, just
a few people jogged or strolled by.

Brogi’s church sits on that thoroughfare. The silent prayer, for a change, didn’t have the
background noise of traffic or tourists.

Italy, like many European countries, has begun allowing businesses, restaurants and shops
to reopen. But the government sparked tensions with the national conference of bishops
when initial plans to loosen restrictions didn’t include a timetable for churches. The Italian
bishops and the government struck a deal two weeks ago that laid out the conditions by
which churches could reopen.

Among the rules: reduced capacities in church buildings, social distancing in pews, no holy
water, masks for everyone.

Brogi said he had not seen parishioners balk at the rules.

“Some have actually exceeded what is necessary, going even farther on the safe side,” he
said before Mass, as several people walked in wearing surgical gloves.

Priests may still hear confession, but not in booths.

“Always with masks on,” said the Rev. Carlo Grosso, another priest at Santa Maria in
Transpontina. “When they confess, I tell them to lower their mask just a little bit so I can
hear. Confession outside the booth still has its own value.” But talking out in the open,
Grosso said, people don’t feel as “protected.”

Toward the end of Mass on Sunday, parishioners noticed one other thing that had
changed: Holy Communion. For Catholics, this means taking a wafer, transformed during
the Mass into the body of Jesus — placed by the priest in the parishioner’s hand or on his
or her tongue. Amid the outbreak, Brogi explained, the latter method would no longer be
an option. Wafers would be placed only in the hand. Before he and other priests went
around to distribute the wafers, he made it clear he was carefully following the rules.

“As you can see, we are sanitizing our hands,” he said.

Then he moved through the pews. Some people weren’t quite sure of the protocols. Again
and again, Brogi stopped next to parishioners and helped them. Yes, he said, it’s okay to
briefly remove your mask. No, you shouldn’t accept Communion while wearing gloves.
After the service was over, people trickled out, some heading to lunch or walking home,
others detouring toward the Vatican for some crowd-free sightseeing. Leonardo Di Pom-
peo, 30, said he and his girlfriend were out for one of the first times since the pandemic hit.
He said they felt safe in a church — even after weeks of watching Masses live-streamed on
the Internet.

“Tt’s not a particularly risky place,” said his girlfriend, Miriana Guarino, 27. “Unlike a res-
taurant. In a restaurant, you want to socialize. In a church, you can be alone with your
prayers in connection with the priest.”

Though they live together, Guarino and Di Pompeo sat on opposite ends of the pew, as did
other couples. Brogi said it was important that not even family members sit shoulder-to-
shoulder, to signify the church as a place where the rules were being uniformly followed.
“It’s a time when people are looking around a lot to see what others are doing,” Guarino
said. “So we’re trying to make people happy and at ease.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200525/page/1/textview 2/2
