2020. 6. 17. Biden says

Biden says
He says Floyd’s death is reminder of nation’s history of violence

The Dallas Morning News - 30 May 2020 - 1A - By COLBY ITKOWITZ

Floyd’s death is a reminder that America is “a country with an open wound.”

   

Joe Biden, the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee, called on every American to
confront the nation’s historic racial injustices and said those who remain silent are “com-
plicit in perpetuating these cycles of violence.”

In a live virtual address Friday afternoon, the former vice president to the nation’s first
African American president spoke gravely about the killing of George Floyd, casting it as
one more unnecessary death of a black American in a long list that dates back hundreds of
years.

“The original sin of this country still stains our nation today,” Biden said solemnly. “And
sometimes we manage to overlook it. We just push forward with a thousand other tasks in
our daily life. But it’s always there. And weeks like this, we see it plainly that we’re a coun-
try with an open wound.”

Without mentioning him by name, Biden also condemned President Donald Trump over a
tweet flagged by Twitter as inciting violence against people protesting Floyd’s killing in
Minnesota.

“It’s no time to encourage violence. This is a national crisis,” Biden said. “We need real
leadership right now, leadership that will bring everyone to the table so we can take mea-
sures to root out systemic racism.”

Earlier in the day, Biden tweeted a simple message seemingly intended for Trump:
“Enough.”

Biden said he had spoken to members of Floyd’s family, who he described as a “close, de-
cent, honorable, family loving one another” who had to hear their loved one beg for air,
calling it “an act of brutality so elemental.”

“It did more than deny one more black man in America his civil rights and his human
rights. It denied him of his very humanity and denied him of his life,” Biden said.

Biden closed his remarks promising the Floyds that “we will do everything in our power to
see to it that justice is had.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200530/page/1/textview 4/1
