2020. 6. 17. Savings offered on insulin costs

Savings offered on insulin costs

White House touts change for seniors who choose drug plans that cap their
monthly cost at $35

The Dallas Morning News - 27 May 2020 - 1A - By RICARDO ALONSOZALDIVAR

Medicare recipients will be able to get prescription plans that limit copays for insulin, a
potential savings of hundreds of dollars a year, the White House announced Tuesday.

   

WASHINGTON — Medicare recipients will be able to get prescription plans that limit co-
pays for insulin, a potential savings of hundreds of dollars, the White House announced
Tuesday in a pivot to pocketbook issues that could influence November’s election.

The new benefit — unveiled at a Rose Garden event Tuesday afternoon — is touted as a
major accomplishment by Trump administration officials eager to change the subject from
the grim drumbeat of coronavirus pandemic news.

Older adults who pick a drug plan offering the new insulin benefit would pay a maximum
of $35 a month starting next year, a savings estimated at $446 annually. Fluctuating cost-
sharing amounts that are common now would be replaced by a manageable amount.

The new insulin benefit will be voluntary, so during open enrollment this fall Medicare re-
cipients who are interested must be sure to pick an insurance plan that provides it. Most
people with Medicare will have access to them.

Stable copays for insulin are the result of a deal shepherded by the administration between
insulin manufacturers and major insurers, Medicare chief Seema Verma told The Associ-
ated Press. The three major suppliers, Eli Lilly, Novo Nordisk and Sanofi, were all involved.
“Tt was a delicate negotiation,” Verma said. Drugmakers and insurers have been at odds in
recent years, blaming each other for high prices. “I do think this is a big step.”

The deal comes as President Donald Trump returns to the issue of drug prices, trying to
woo older people whose votes are critical to his reelection prospects.

The cost of insulin is one the biggest worries for consumers generally concerned about
high prices for brand name drugs. Millions of people with diabetes use insulin to keep their
blood sugar level normal and stave off complications that can include heart disease, blind-
ness, kidney failure and amputations.

Trump last week told Republican senators at a Capitol Hill meeting that he still wanted to
pass a bill this year to lower drug costs, saying “I think you have to do it,” according toa
summary from a person who was there. Bipartisan legislation to limit price increases and
reduce costs for older people with high drug bills is pending in the Senate.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200527/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Savings offered on insulin costs

An APNORC poll in May found that 54% of adults 60 and older disapproved of how Trump
is handling his job as president, while 45% approved.

The fate of drug pricing legislation ultimately seems to rest with House Speaker Nancy
Pelosi, who has a much more ambitious plan for Medicare to negotiate prices for the

costliest drugs, not just insulin. Pelosi would use expected savings to provide vision, dental
and hearing coverage for older adults. But most Republicans oppose that approach.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200527/page/1/textview 2/2
