2020. 6. 17. Delivery apps: Opaque rules and poor pay await many workers.

Delivery apps: Opaque rules and poor pay await many work-
ers.

As more than 38 million people have filed for unemployment, Amazon, Do-
ordash, Instacart and others have pitched hundreds of thousands of new
gig jobs

The Washington Post - 27 May 2020 - A1 - BY NITASHA TIKU nitasha.tiku@washpost.com

Ivan Salgado, a 32-year-old bartender and server at his family’s Mexican restaurant in
Chicago, volunteered to stop working in late March so his aunt wouldn’t have to lay off any
other servers.

4 : s
aT ee |

    

shelterin-place order. But Salgado had his own car and figured he would have an easier
time finding a side hustle than his co-workers. To make rent, he threw himself into work-
ing full time for grocery delivery company Instacart, which has exploded in popularity
during the coronavirus pandemic and is hiring 550,000 workers to keep up with demand.
“Honestly, I feel like I have no other choice,” he said. “There’s really no other place to
work unless it’s working at a grocery store, doing delivery service like this.”

More than 38 million people have filed for unemployment nationwide in the past two
months. At the same time, hundreds of thousands of gig jobs became available from busi-
nesses including Amazon, Doordash, Instacart and Shipt, a delivery app acquired by Tar-
get. Like Salgado, many workers who have been furloughed, laid off or can’t work from
home are rushing into the gig economy, lured by the promise of an immediate and flexible
way to earn money.

This massive influx of new gig workers could become a more permanent fixture of the
economy if consumer demand for home delivery stays strong after the pandemic or if tech
companies normalize replacing employees with gig jobs. That means more Americans
could face the same inequities exposed by the virus, such as access to health care and sick
leave.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200527/page/1/textview 115
2020. 6. 17. Delivery apps: Opaque rules and poor pay await many workers.

Even in the best of times, gig work offered few protections. But the pandemic has increased
the stakes of operating without a safety net. Most on-demand companies offset thin profit
margins by offloading the risk onto workers, who are classified as independent contractors
and have to provide their own vehicle and gas. There is a lack of basic employee protec-
tions. Take-home pay is volatile, and there is no minimum wage or overtime.

“Tt’s one of the most vivid illustrations of how work has become more precarious,” said
Molly Kinder, a fellow at the Brookings Institution, a public-policy think tank. “In a mo-
ment where we are all feeling vulnerable — about our jobs, our family and our health — it
makes us think: Is this really what we want the work of the future to be?”

State and local officials have now deemed these workers essential, but companies continue
to treat them as replaceable. Workers say packages of face masks and hand sanitizer have
arrived delayed or damaged. Doordash charges drivers up to $5 per shipment of face masks
and hand sanitizer. Instacart told Salgado on April 11 that his safety gear was in the mail,
but he still hasn’t received it. In response to questions from The Washington Post, In-
stacart said the kit was still in transit and the company would expedite a new one to Sal-
gado. Doordash declined to comment.

There were 1.6 million gig workers in the United States in 2017, according to the most re-
cent survey from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Surveys conducted around that time by
Mckinsey Global Institute and the Freelancers’ Union found that 25 to 30 percent of all U.S.
workers engaged in nontraditional or gig work, as either a primary or supplementary in-
come.

Silicon Valley, led by Uber and Lyft, spent a decade pitching this labor arrangement as both
empowering and inevitable.

But, illustrating the volatility of gig work, Uber’s ride-hailing business has fallen by 80
percent during the coronavirus crisis, chief executive Dara Khosrowshahi said during an
earnings call this month — meaning many fewer rides for its drivers. Forty percent of the
app’s drivers in the United States and Canada were crossdispatched in April to Uber Eats.
Despite a rising number of covid-19 cases among workers at grocery stores and Amazon
warehouses, the companies have filled the majority of their new positions.

Instacart, founded in 2012, more than doubled its workforce in two months, thanks in part
to Facebook ads with the coronavirus-sensitive slogan “Make money without passen-
gers.” Target’s Shipt brought on 100,000 workers, doubling the size of its fleet in two
months after six years in business. Doordash launched a program to quickly approve fur-
loughed restaurant workers for gig jobs on its platform. And Amazon has seen more new
drivers sign up for Amazon Flex, a gig service where workers use their own vehicles to de-
liver packages or groceries from Whole Foods, said spokeswoman Rena Lunak. (Amazon
CEO Jeff Bezos owns The Washington Post.)

In interviews with 20 people who signed up for these jobs since the coronavirus crisis hit
two months ago, workers said the barriers to entry were low, with the apps requiring little
more than a background check, driver’s license and car insurance. But many found a steep
learning curve in navigating company policies that shape pay and hours. Nearly all recruits
said the availability of work and pay dropped off after a few weeks. In online forums,
workers blame the drop on bots or the deluge of new workers.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200527/page/1/textview 2/5
2020. 6. 17. Delivery apps: Opaque rules and poor pay await many workers.

Instacart said its gig workers, known as shoppers, “appreciate the choice and flexibility
that shopping on the Instacart plat

form affords them,” according to spokeswoman Natalia Montalvo. She added that most
shoppers “use Instacart primarily to supplement their income from other forms of work
— providing a critical lifeline for people during this economic downturn.”

Shipt spokeswoman Julie Coop said policy changes during the pandemic have benefited
workers. “We are committed to our people, and work closely with our independent shop-
pers to ensure working opportunities that meet their needs,” Coop said.

Max Rettig, head of public policy for Doordash, said, “We will continue to do everything we
can to promote the health and safety of those we serve through our platform while provid-
ing meaningful, flexible earning opportunities during this time of economic crisis.” He
added that its drivers earned on average more than $23 per hour last month, including tips.
Lunak said Amazon Flex offers workers an opportunity to set their own schedule and that,
on average, workers drive 13 hours per week and earn more than $25 an hour.

Lawmakers have expanded benefits such as unemployment to gig workers in recent
months, despite the fact that companies have

not paid into state unemployment funds. (In some states, income from gig apps can reduce
the amount of unemployment workers are able to collect, but laws vary.)

This month, California sued Uber and Lyft for denying workers minimum wage, overtime
and sick leave, in violation of a state law that went into effect in January, but companies
say it does not apply. “Sometimes it takes a pandemic to shake us into realizing what that
really means and who suffers the consequences,” California Attorney General Xavier Be-
cerra said during a news conference announcing the lawsuit.

In the meantime, the flood of new gig workers has become the most high-stakes test of
flexibility versus precarity.

“A lot of them don’t know how to schedule themselves, navigate through the app or see
their earnings,” said Nicholas Trinidad, who has been working for Doordash and other de-
livery apps for two years and fields questions from recruits while waiting in restaurant
parking lots or at the grocery store.

Many recruits are learning by doing. Debbie Everitt Welker has worked as a hair stylist in
Texas since 1984 but found herself temporarily out of a job when the Dallas salon where
she cuts hair had to close to comply with shelter-in-place orders. Welker signed up for In-
stacart after an ad popped up on Facebook promising up to $25 per hour. Grocery shopping
sounded simple enough. After all, she’d been doing it for decades.

Welker knew she would still have to deduct money for gas, taxes, and wear and tear on her
car, but she figured even $15 an hour was worth her time. “I never imagined it would be
under $10 an hour,” she said.

Instacart’s algorithm organizes grocery orders into “batches,” which can include up to
three different customers. Workers then select gigs from a Twitter-like feed, which shows
earnings per batch in one lump sum, including tips.

Welker soon discovered that customer tips are reduced when items are not in stock, an in-
evitable occurrence during a pandemic. “I thought when you accepted a batch, that was
what you made,” she said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200527/page/1/textview 3/5
2020. 6. 17. Delivery apps: Opaque rules and poor pay await many workers.

The reliance on tips also hurt Salgado, the restaurant worker in Chicago. For a while, he
made $150 a day for five or six hours of work, slightly more per hour than he made during
shifts at the restaurant. But he also had a customer who lowered his tip from 53 percent to
zero after the groceries were delivered, a practice known as tip-baiting, where customers
offer a high tip to try to snatch a delivery slot and then claw it back. Instacart allows cus-
tomers to increase or decrease their tip up to three days after an order is complete.

“I’m grabbing all these groceries that other people have touched,” Salgado said. “I’m still
putting myself at risk just for them to take the money back?”

Some recruits who opted for gig work because of the flexibility found themselves devoting
unpaid hours to refreshing the app to find work — especially after the number of gigs
seemed to drop off after a few weeks.

Kelly, a former corporate marketing consultant, has been flipping houses in Pittsburgh
since 2018. But in mid-march, the real estate market essentially shut down after city in-
spectors and appraisers were sent home. Kelly, who declined to give her last name out of
fear of retaliation from Amazon, signed up for Amazon Flex because she wanted to work
only two or three days a week. But three weeks after starting, the 47year-old had sucha
hard time finding orders that for a few weeks she set an alarm for 4 a.m. to grab shifts be-
fore they disappeared.

And despite completing all the online video tutorials, she didn’t know that Flex drivers
could ask to be compensated if it takes them longer to deliver all the packages than the
time Amazon estimates. Amazon calls this an “adjustment,” but “most people out in the
real world would call [it] overtime pay,” Kelly said.

When the app is down, it can cost drivers money as well as time. Meredith Troy, who
started working for Instacart last month in Oviedo, Fla., said the app crashed just as she
had almost finished shopping. Troy was new to gig work after her other three jobs fell
through: tutoring and child care — paused during shelter-in-place — and caregiving at an
assistedliving facility from which she says she was fired after a disagreement with her
manager.

At first when the app crashed, Troy was resigned to losing an hour putting all the items
back on the shelves. But when she tried to cancel, a pop-up in the app warned her that too
many cancellations could affect her internal ratings. “I was looking at the pork loins in the
shopping cart, thinking, ‘Oh, my God, these things are going to go bad, it’s going to reflect
badly on me, the customer is going to put in complaints,’ ” she said. So Troy got out her
credit card and paid $229.92 herself.

When the app came back online later that day, she explained the ordeal to several service
representatives, showing photos of the receipts and screen shots of the customer orders.
Troy waited weeks for her full reimbursement, which came through only after The Post
asked Instacart about it.

Online forums for workers on Facebook, Reddit and Discord are dotted with stories like
Troy’s about getting the runaround from the companies, even when it comes to the two
coronavirusrelated health benefits promised to most gig workers: free safety gear and paid
leave for those with the virus or officially instructed to self-quarantine. Even workers who

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200527/page/1/textview 4/5
2020. 6. 17. Delivery apps: Opaque rules and poor pay await many workers.

have been told by a doctor that they contracted the novel coronavirus, but were not tested,
have had trouble accessing health benefits, according to interviews with veteran workers.
Some people who recently signed up for gig work were laid off or furloughed from jobs that
didn’t easily cross the digital divide.

Shaylie May, a 22-year-old dance instructor who teaches modern dance, ballet and other
classes at a studio in St. George, Utah, is able to do a couple of classes a week on Zoom, but
it’s not enough to pay the bills, so she signed up to deliver food for DoorDash in late March.
St. George is a resort town without many tourists now, and May can find orders only dur-
ing peak hours.

When she posted on social media about working for Doordash, a friend who teaches dance
at the same studio called and asked whether she was serious. “What’s the other option?”
May said she asked her friend. “Either that or I don’t make bills for a couple months.” The
friend ended up signing up, too.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200527/page/1/textview 5/5
