2020. 6. 18. KNOWING THE DRILL

KNOWING THE DRILL
Company offers software, data to speed well development

The Oklahoman : 9 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Jack Money Business writer jmoney@oklahoman.com

Enverus rolls out software to support oil, gas operators

ae

 

Hard work begins for oil and gas developers long before a rig spuds a well.

Any proposed project must include a spacing unit that doesn't conflict with any estab-
lished ones nearby.

Additionally, geological information that identifies the targeted formation, tracks its his-
torical development over time and identifies other subsurface features that exist where the
well will be drilled must be included in any permit request submitted to the Oklahoma Cor-
poration Commission (OCC).

The puzzle representing a geological kind of Rubik's Cubemust be unlocked before each
well is permitted, and gathering the required information to develop adequate plans takes
time.

But Enverus, an on-demand software and data analytics

company that follows the oil and gas industry, rolled out a new product that officials say
can help its customers speed that process along.

Officials said the company's new Oklahoma Source Spacing/ Units software, available for
free to Enverus+ subscribers, makes available formation development and spacing histo-
ries across the entire state.

The map- based software currently provides users with a two-dimensional image that dis-
plays information that's linked with clickable data points bringing up specific records the
company used to build its database.

“Navigating OCC s pacing/units is a complicated and time-consuming endeavor,” re-
marked Brad McPherson, director of Enverus' operations in Oklahoma. “Whether it's an
$11 million horizontal or a $200,000 shallow well, it must live in a unit or box.”

Efforts to share the data that supports the new program started in 2006 when Enverus,
then known as Drillinginfo, collaborated with Oil-Law Records (OLR) to make the infor-
mation available to its customers.

Officials said OLR, founded in 1955 and acquired by Enverus in 2017, has served for decades
as the go-to place operators have used to obtain that needed information.

The company, known for keeping the most intricate and detailed sets of Oklahoma oil and
gas well spacing records in existence, was founded by “three of the brightest engineers
who ever worked in the oil and gas industry in Oklahoma,” McPherson said.

“They saw the geological world in four dimensions and created a tabular system that used
a card catalog index to piece it all together,” he explained.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/20200609/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. KNOWING THE DRILL

Officials said the process to launch Oklahoma Source Spacing/ Units specifically began
when Enverus acquired OLR, “with the goal of putting it in front of our customers as
quickly as possible,” he said.

“Tt includes that four dimensional information, shown in a two-dimensional environ-
ment,” McPherson said. “But we believe we will be updating the system, over time, to vis-
ually be able to show all the levels of information.”

He also noted the software's rollout is particularly meaningful, given the challenges Okla-
homa-based oil and gas operators face today.

“In today's downturn, operators cannot afford to waste time or cut corners when the
stakes are this high,” he said. “We're now doing it for them in seconds, following the geo-
logical and legal development of zones and formations over time and distance with the
thoroughness previously reserved only for making a new application for spacing.

“It is as comprehensive

as any system in any industry you will ever find.”

Allen Gilmer, one of Enverus' founders, said the new product also saves operators time in
another important way.

The software, he explained, gives operators “the ability to easily evaluate other potential
project locations they might be able to exploit because they can use it to see where non-
pooled oil and gas resources currently exist.

“You can look at formation after formation to see where oil and gas is being produced and
where the gaps are.”

And both Gilmer and McPherson noted the offering is the second of two launched by En-
vetrus this year to aid industry players.

In May, the company released Open Insights, software that enables energy companies to
gain detailed understanding of their spend data — a common “black hole” for many com-
panies that are looking for innovative ways to unlock meaningful savings as an alternative
to the pain of layoffs.

Enverus encourages existing customers interested in either the new Oklahoma Source
Spacing/ Units or Open Insights to contact their account managers via enverus.com.

“Our( software solutions) em body everything that is great about Enverus, focusing on
what we do best — working collaboratively to create something new of value that helps
others lower their overhead and save them time and money every day in their work flows
,” Gilmer said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/20200609/page/1/textview 2/2
