2020. 6. 17. College recruiting about to become ‘wild, wild West’

College recruiting about to become ‘wild, wild West’
Coaches expect chaos after swarm of early commitments

The Dallas Morning News - 26 May 2020 - 1A - CALLIE CAPLAN callie.caplan@dallasnews.com

Having a couple of rising seniors commit to colleges early this spring was no surprise to
Michael Traylor, South Oak Cliff ’s football recruiting coordinator.

 

suits.

But then another of Traylor’s players chose a college in May. And another. And another.
South Oak Cliff ’s upcoming senior class — with five players already pledged to colleges
and a few more to come this spring — soon mirrored a national trend, and concern, amid
the CO

VID19 coronavirus pandemic.

High school football players have orally committed to college programs at an increased
rate this spring. The NCAA prohibiting inperson evaluations and campus visits amplified
pressure to secure a roster spot.

The fallout of the boom, Dallasarea coaches and recruiting experts predict, won’t be lim-
ited to one spring of limited recruiting exposure or to only the 2021 class.

As many brace for potential changes to the NCAA’S signing periods, transfer rules, schol-
arship availability and more,

Traylor predicts an already fluid college recruiting landscape to become “the wild, wild
West.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200526/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. College recruiting about to become ‘wild, wild West’

“There is no telling what the NCAA is going to do,” Desoto coach and former SMU assis-
tant Claude Mathis said. “Like the state of Texas, it can be sunny one day, foggy, cold,
windy, rainy, you have no idea.

“T expect some things to change with the NCAA. I really do.”

According to a national recruiting analysis by USA Today, more than 600 players in the
2021 class had orally committed to FBS schools by May 11. That doubled the number of
commitments by May 11 in the 2020 class and exceeded the total number of commitments
in the time frame from the previous two classes combined.

Since the NCAA suspended oncampus recruiting and visits in midmarch, 14 “power five”
programs have received at least seven oral commitments, according to USA Today.

In the Dallas area, 26 players in the current Sportsday top 50 for 2021 had orally commit-
ted to college programs as of Friday. Through the same period last cycle, 18 of the area’s
top 50 players had pledged.

College recruiting was already an “inexact science,” Cedar Hill recruiting coordinator

D.J. Mann said, with noncommittable offers and conditional stipulations clouding the
process.

That coronavirus shutdowns altered efforts during the spring — when top Dallasarea high
school teams would’ve hosted hundreds of scouts to talk with players and watch practices
— and threatened to upend the economics of higher education, putting the onus on some
players to quickly accept an offer, Mann said.

SMU, for example, has 10 players committed to its 2021 class, all from Texas. Seven
pledged after April 17, when the UIL announced it would cancel remaining spring sports
and activities.

Proximity to home and local familiarity have been part of SMU’S recruiting pitch, espe-
cially as NCAA travel limitations have become increasingly uncertain for this recruiting cy-
cle.

Should traditional recruiting tactics resume in the fall, expect another wave of decommit-
ments, coaches said.

Players who’ve progressed in size and strength since last fall — the most recent chance to
log live observation and highlight tape — could garner attention from more, and perhaps
more prestigious, schools. So could seniors who debut on varsity after waiting for playing
time behind previous star teammates.

Like scholarship offers, oral commitments are nonbinding.

“T think we’ re going to see what could be the largest amounts of decommitments that
we’ve ever seen,” Mann said.

A rush of flipped commitments, coaches said, might just be the tipping point of recruiting
chaos for years to come.

The NCAA’S early signing period each December for football scholarships has become pop-
ular since its 2017 introduction.

Players view it as an avenue to confirm their scholarship sooner and to sometimes enroll a
semester early. Top college programs secure the majority of their classes before the tradi-
tional February signing day and can focus on evaluating younger players during winter
visits.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200526/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. College recruiting about to become ‘wild, wild West’

Recruits in the 2021 class may not be ready to sign in December 2020 if the NCAA continues
limitations on inperson contacts through the summer or fall. Colleges, then, could spend
an extra sixplus weeks courting 2021 players, rather than recruiting the sophomore and
junior classes.

“T think we will,” Oklahoma cooffensive coordinator Cale Gundy said when asked whether
the Sooners might change their approach to the 2021 periods. “But again, until we know
exactly what we’re dealt, you just don’t want to get too tied up into it.”

Regardless of timing, 2021 players will sign with schools they’ve had scant opportunity to
visit.

Most prospects capitalize on free time for travel in the spring. High school football games,
practices and playoff runs dictate their availability in the fall. The coronavirus could add
further complications.

The NCAA on Wednesday announced it turned down at least until 202122 a proposed one-
time waiver that would allow college athletes to transfer and be immediately eligible. But if
players can’t visit in the fall, some local experts predict the NCAA will face pressure to pass
the measure.

“Missing out on [official visits] is definitely going to throw a monkey wrench in the re-
cruiting process,” Duncanville recruiting coordinator Eric Mims Sr. said.

Dallasarea coaches also worry about scholarship availability.

Because the NCAA won’t institute umbrella guidelines for a 2020 football season, logistics
will likely fall to conference commissioners. Should their decisions not yield universal
consistency for holding a full fall season, ramifications could reflect the scholarship issues
spring sports teams faced.

Some Dallasarea coaches wonder: Would the NCAA grant an extra year of eligibility for se-
niors or all players on teams that don’t hold a football season, even if some schools did?
Would the NCAA’S 80scholarshipsperfootballteam limit expand to account for mass re-
turns at those schools only? If not, would incoming players without formal scholarship
guarantees suffer?

The expanding list of hypothetical scenarios — some more likely than others, but all more
likely than most previously imagined — often cross Traylor’s mind as the South Oak Cliff
recruiting coordinator sits in his pseudo office at home.

Each day, Traylor uses multiple computer screens to organize player film, recruiting pro-
files and video conferences with college coaches while fielding calls from concerned par-
ents and players who ask questions with few concrete answers.

“A lot of them are nervous,” Traylor said. “Kids are just trying to ensure they have a spot
to go to to ensure their education and their athletic chances.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200526/page/1/textview 3/3
