2020. 6. 17. Softer voices but a lot to say

Softer voices but a lot to say

The Dallas Morning News - 5 Jun 2020 - 1A - By TOM STEELE, NATALY KEOMOUNGKHOUN, HAYAT NORIMINE and DAVID TAR-
RANT Staff Writers

Jaida Walcott stood in front of demonstrators as they knelt on the scorching concrete at Dallas City
Hall on Thursday and trembled as she read from the pieces of paper in her hands.

 

Walcott, 21, said she fears for her autistic 2yearold nephew, knowing he will grow up to be a tall
black man like her father and worrying about what the world will be like for him.

“Our people are tired, our people are dying, and our people are tired of dying,” Walcott said.

On the seventh day of protests in Dallas, several hundred demonstrators started the morning by giv-
ing their voices a rest, holding signs that decried police brutality and systemic racism as they sat
outside City Hall.

But later in the day, Walcott and many others gave impassioned speeches about why they were mak-
ing a stand and what they hoped to accomplish.

Some black demonstrators spoke to The Dallas Morning News about friends who had been beaten or
killed by police or had been mistaken for someone else officers were pursuing, as well as their fears
about the future of their young relatives.

Drake Thomas, a 27year

old hotel manager, stood in silence. Quietly he said he had grown up with Andrew Collins, a black
man who was beaten by a white officer in Dallas in 2010 after being pulled over. The city settled his
civil rights lawsuit in 2012.

Thomas said that he had grown up in white communities and always thought living a certain way
would “make some change,” but that he’s been disheartened to still see the brutality against black
people.

“It’s my life. It’s my family and friends. I guess my only fear is that it’s the popular thing,” he said
of the protests, “and in two weeks everyone will go back to normal. That it’s — just a popular photo
op.”

Emotionally exhausted

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200605/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Softer voices but a lot to say

Laura Westerlage, who works at The Stewpot of First Presbyterian Church, organized the silent
morning protest after searching for a way to help. She serves homeless people — who in Dallas are
disproportionately black — and she said the protests are against more than just police violence.
Westerlage, who is white, said she wanted to speak up for black people and show her support, but
mostly wanted to listen. People aren’t born with the same footing, she said.

“The police issue is just very much apparent. It’s in our face. We've seen the videos, they’re horrify-
ing,” she said. “I do think that it’s bringing more people on board to seeing the greater injustice
that’s happening in all our systems. ... There’s so much work to be done across the board.”

Adrienne Peoples, 36, and her 27yearold sister, Dallas Peoples, said they had come to create a better
place for their black nephews. They said they were emotionally drained by seeing continued mis-
treatment of black people.

Adrienne Peoples said being black means having to explain why you’re doing the same things every-
one else is doing, and constantly getting suspicious looks.

At a grocery store, “if I’m in leggings and a Tshirt, I probably came to get some groceries, not rob
the place,” she said.

‘We’re going to the polls’

In the late afternoon, the demonstration outside City Hall had the air of a religious revival. About 100
people stood in a circle in the shade of live oak trees as the Rev. Darell A. Smith led them in prayer.
He exhorted the crowd to attack racism “on a spiritual level.”

Smith, a minister at Victory Outreach Church in Far East Dallas, urged people to make their voices
heard on Election Day too.

“We're going to pray, and we’re going to the polls,” he said.

The prayerfilled rally broke up after an hour as several hundred protesters started streaming down
the sidewalk on Young Street, chanting the familiar refrain “I can’t breathe.”

The march was the third event of the week for 23yearold Gail Mcgehee.

She said Thursday’s protest felt drastically different from the last one she attended, which ended up
at a park outside the curfew zone.

“Police cars just lined up along the street around this park staring at us,” she said. “It felt like they
were waiting for us to do something that was just unlawful enough, like jaywalking, to stop us.”

On Thursday, squad cars blocked traffic along the route to allow protesters to peacefully walk
through the city. Hundreds walked and chanted from City Hall to Victory Park as motorists honked
their horns in solidarity.

The group stopped to take a knee during a moment of silence on the steps of American Airlines Cen-
ter before returning to City Hall. Many also raised handdrawn signs reading “Black Lives Matter.”
‘We have to put in the work’

Tierra Jenae Giles, 23, was one of several members of Delta Sigma Theta Sorority Inc. who asked the
group to take another knee at the park in front of City Hall. Giles said she had wanted to help orga-
nize the march to allow people to come together in a civil way, but she hadn’t expected hundreds to
turn out to protest alongside her.

“Today we felt like a lot of our people came out to be with each other and uplift each other,” she
said. “It was important for us to grab everyone’s attention on the way there and on the way back,
peacefully.”

Tiffany Floyd, 26, who works in a hospital alongside Giles and also helped organize a group of
demonstrators, said she wanted to prove that rioters and protesters are separate groups with differ-
ent priorities.

“Those rioters — they are not the protesters, they’re just people who are just acting out,” Floyd
said. “We're trying to show everyone else that we are peaceful.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200605/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Softer voices but a lot to say

Around 6:45 p.m. the crowd scattered, and the entire plaza outside City Hall had cleared before the 7
o’clock curfew. A few dozen protesters later marched up Greenville Avenue, with several Dallas offi-
cers joining their procession.

Those who organized the event said it was successful, but Floyd said one march wouldn’t fix every-
thing.

“We could stand out here all day and say that George Floyd matters, but we have to put in the work,”
she said. “We have to put in the work.”

Protests elsewhere

Fort Worth City Council members agreed at their meeting Thursday not to extend the city’s 8 p.m.
curfew.

A resolution on the agenda that could have kept the curfew going until Tuesday was withdrawn
unanimously.

Mayor Betsy Price had declared the curfew Monday, a day after protesters and police had a tense,
hourslong standoff on the city’s West Seventh Street Bridge.

Price praised the peaceful protesting, KXASTV (NBC5) reported.

“My door is open always, but I think it’s more important to come out here where you are to come to-
gether in unity here,” she said.

With the curfew gone, protesters remained on the steps of the Tarrant County Courthouse well into
the night.

In Mckinney, Collin County churches organized a gathering of maybe 1,000 people to express a mes-
sage of unity and love.

In Addison, Police Chief Paul Spencer addressed a crowd of more than 400 at Addison Circle.

“What we stand for is equality for everyone,” he said. “The fact that people feel they do not matter
bothers me.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200605/page/1/textview 3/3
