2020. 6. 17. Rep. Eddie Bernice Johnson

Rep. Eddie Bernice Johnson
‘We just want to be treated the same,’ congresswoman says

The Dallas Morning News - 6 Jun 2020 - 1A - By HAYAT NORIMINE Staff Writer hayat.norimine@dallasnews.com

 

oa Ses
As the first black woman elected from Dallas to the Texas House in 1972, U.S. Rep. Eddie
Bernice Johnson, a
Democrat, recalled that she was tasked to study race relations and policing during her first
term in office. Since then, nothing has changed, she said.
Rep. Johnson urged white people to help black representatives who have long called for a
reform of the justice system.
“It is not us” who have turned a blind eye, she said.
“We need them to understand that we are black every day, and every day we are reminded
that we’re black,” Johnson said. “We just want to be treated the same as everyone else. We
want our children to feel that this nation is fair. We built this nation. We were brought here
to do that.”
Early Friday, Rep. Johnson and Dallas Mayor Eric Johnson (no relation to the representa-
tive) stood in the Dallas City Hall plaza to remember George Floyd and other black victims
who had been killed at the hands of police.
City Council members, City Manager T.C. Broadnax,
Police Chief U. Renee Hall and other city officials stood side by side as they heard from the
mayor, the congresswoman and faith leaders.
In a proclamation, Mayor Johnson declared Friday George Floyd Remembrance Day and
said it was a tribute to the “turning point” he represents for the country. The mayor said
that as an African American, he understands that much of the violence against black men
has been “supported and sanctioned by the state.”
“The killing of our brother, George Floyd, hurts,” he said. “But if you’re African American,
you probably also place what you saw in the context of the fact that our people were
brought to this country 400 years ago for the very purpose of racial injustice.”
But not everyone was satisfied with the speeches.
Shenita Cleveland called on the mayor to do more. Cleveland said she had been arrested
Sunday after violating the curfew to protest downtown and was handcuffed for seven
hours.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200606/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Rep. Eddie Bernice Johnson

She criticized the city for not dropping charges on all protesters after they backed off on
charging the nearly 700 who walked onto the Margaret Hunt Hill Bridge on Monday. Some
council members listened to Cleveland and another demonstrator as they spoke using a
megaphone.

“Thank you for the proclamation, but we need action,” Cleveland said.

The mayor said he didn’t know why the reckoning with police violence didn’t happen
sooner with other deaths captured on video, such as Eric Garner — a 43yearold black man
who’d been choked to death in New York on July 17, 2014. — or Tamir Rice — a 12yearold
black boy fatally shot by police in Cleveland in November of that same year. He had been
carrying a toy gun.

As the event neared the end, officials and onlookers took a moment of silence that lasted
eight minutes and 46 seconds, the time an officer held his knee on Floyd’s neck. Several
laid down while others knelt. The only sounds came from a helicopter above the plaza and
a dog’s barks.

“T don’t know why or how exactly we got here,” the mayor said.

He added that he wondered if the coronavirus had made the public more reflective.

“But I will tell you this as the mayor of this great city,” he said. “I’m glad it’s happening.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200606/page/1/textview 2/2
