2020. 6. 17. Biden decries Trump’s show of force, vows to heal, unite

Biden decries Trump’s show of force, vows to heal, unite

The Washington Post - 3 Jun 2020 - A1 : BY ANNIE LINSKEY, MATT VISER AND SEAN SULLIVAN

Former vice president Joe Biden promised Tuesday to secure the nation’s unmet promises
to minority Americans, drawing a sustained contrast with President Trump as he vowed
not to “traffic in fear and division” and “fan the flames of hate.”

 

Biden, the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee, sought with the somber
pageantry of a flag-draped background and echoes of past American leaders to distinguish
himself from the divisive presence of Trump, whose administration Monday night
roughed up and pushed back peaceful protesters on a street one block from the White
House. Trump then crossed the newly cleared path to pose with a Bible in front of a historic
church.

“We can be forgiven for believing that the president is more interested in power than in
principle,” Biden said. Trump is “more interested in serving the passions of his base than
the needs of the people in his care.”

“T’ Il do my job, and I will take responsibility. I won’t blame others,” Biden said, adding,
“T’ ll seek to heal the racial wounds that have long plagued this country — not use them for
political gain.”

Biden announced one major new proposal — a ban on police chokeholds — and reiterated
many of the plans he had released earlier in the campaign. He also promised to tackle
larger themes and lay out more robust policies on systemic racism and the country’s pain
in the coming weeks.

But much of his approach rested on familiarity and empathy. For days, as the nation has
convulsed with protests and oc

casional violence, Biden has sought to offer voters a distinct choice in November, present-
ing himself as a candidate who, unlike Trump, is sympathetic to the anger in the streets
over the police killing of a Minneapolis man, George Floyd, and generations of other
abuses. Floyd died May 25 after one officer drove a knee into his neck and others put pres-
sure on his back as he lay handcuffed on the street, begging for air.

Tuesday’s speech marked a potentially pivotal moment for Biden, who has put African
American support at the center of his campaign but has struggled at times to move past a
record on criminal justice and other issues that puts him at odds with many current civil

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200603/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. Biden decries Trump’s show of force, vows to heal, unite

rights activists. Just less than two weeks ago, he told a largely African American audience
on a popular radio show that “you ain’t black” if you’re considering supporting Trump. He
quickly apologized after he was criticized as taking black votes for granted.

Tuesday’s speech generated differing reactions.

“The main point of today’s speech was to try to call the country together, to root out a very
serious problem that affects too many people in America,” said Rep. Cedric L. Richmond
(D-LA.), a Biden campaign co-chair. “I think he was being candid. One, showing America
what real leadership looks like, what real leadership should sound like. And real leadership
should call America to come together and answer this crisis.”

Cornell William Brooks, a former president of the NAACP and a professor at the Harvard
Kennedy School, said he thought Biden would be judged by “not what he said perfectly, but
what he tried to say at all.”

“Was it a perfect speech? No. But was it the kind of speech you can hear in the words a
president? I don’t think you can deny that,” Brooks said.

Biden’s nationally televised appearance was designed to put him on the same plane with
the president he will meet on Election Day in November. While Philadelphia is the head-
quarters for Biden’s campaign, he has not been there for months, having remained in his
Wilmington, Del., home under restrictions meant to slow the spread of the novel coron-
avirus. It was the first speech he has given before an audience rather than a solitary camera
since March.

For the past three days, however, Biden has emerged and repeatedly made the point with
protestconnected appearances that he would be a different president — stylistically and in
terms of policy — from Trump.

On Sunday, Biden visited protesters in Wilmington, while Trump issued scattershot mes-
sages on social media, including one that read simply: “LAW & ORDER!”

On Monday, Biden listened to critics and mayors during sessions aimed at understanding
how to address the unrest spreading across the nation. Trump that day berated governors
for not using proper force to quell it.

Also on Monday, Biden took a knee after listening to critics and praying with them ina
Wilmington church. Trump relied on force — including flash-bang grenades — to clear
peaceful protesters so he could stand in front of a boarded-up St. John’s Episcopal Church,
across Lafayette Square from the White House, and pose with a Bible. The gesture drew an
angry denunciation from the church’s leaders. He later mobilized the U.S. military, which
flew Blackhawk helicopters over Washington neighborhoods in a show of force.

Implicit in Biden’s approach has been the suggestion that while his record may have
shortcomings, he has more affinity and empathy for the black community than Trump,
who days ago derided protesters as “thugs.”

“He did exactly what he needed to do,” said Roland Martin, an African American activist
and radio host who has been critical of Biden. “The reality is, the contrast is his greatest
strength, Biden’s empathy and tone. Compare that with the fake John Wayne persona from
Trump.”

“But he needs to keep this up,” Martin said, suggesting that the former vice president
should travel to Minneapolis, where a street memorial on the site of Floyd’s killing has at-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200603/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. Biden decries Trump’s show of force, vows to heal, unite

tracted tens of thousands of visitors.

Biden launched his speech by speaking to the nation’s concerns over police brutality, pay-
ing homage to Floyd and making a mantra of his final utterances — “I can’t breathe.”
“George Floyd’s last words. But they didn’t die with him. They’re still being heard. Echoing
across this nation,” Biden said. “They speak to a nation where too often just the color of
your skin puts your life at risk. They speak to a nation where more than 100,000 people
have lost their lives to a virus and 40 million have filed for unemployment — but the dis-
proportionate number of those deaths and job losses is concentrated in the black and
brown communities.”

“It’s a wake-up call for our nation, in my view,” he added. “For all of us. And I mean all of
us.”

He noted that Eric Garner, who died six years ago in police custody in New York under sim-
ilar circumstances, had uttered the same words.

“It’s time to listen to those words,” Biden said. “To try to understand them to respond —
to respond with action. Our country is crying out for leadership. Leadership that can unite
us, leadership that brings us together.”

He also criticized the president’s recent repeated use of language that evoked scars of the
civil rights era. The president tweeted in recent days that looting would be followed by
shooting, playing on a saying uttered by a police chief in the 1960s against civil rights pro-
testers. And Trump threatened the use of dogs and force against demonstrators, as was
commonplace during that time.

“TI truly believe in my heart of hearts, we can overcome,” Biden said, one of several times
he drew on phrases from the era in solidarity with its cause.

During the roughly 20-minute address, Biden repeatedly quoted or echoed civil rights
leaders from earlier generations, including Rosa Parks and the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr.
But he also named some of today’s leaders, including the Rev. William Barber, and called
on Congress to act now to reform policing laws — including passage of a bill introduced by
Rep. Hakeem Jeffries (D-N.Y.) to outlaw chokeholds.

“Tt was powerful to hear Joe Biden acknowledge that it’s important to now make [the po-
lice chokehold) unlawful,” Jeffries said in an interview. “The Congressional Black Caucus
is leading the legislative effort to develop, in partnership with the nation’s leading civil
rights groups, a comprehensive legislative response. And Joe Biden’s voice in support of
that response once it has been developed will be incredibly important.”

The former vice president also made it clear that the demonstrations are pushing him to
rethink some parts of his agenda.

“Biden probably did just as much, if not more, sympathizing with the protesters and their
plight than even Obama did during Ferguson,” said Jon Favreau, a former speechwriter for
President Barack Obama, referring to the unrest in 2014 following the fatal police shooting
of Michael Brown in Ferguson, Mo. “Because the debate has moved since then... . He could
have gone out there and just given a rhetorical speech about ‘Let’s all come together.’ But
he proposed some pretty serious police reform policies as well.”

Until Tuesday, Biden had largely avoided calling for specific new reforms to deal with the
repetitive use of force by police departments, most notably against nonwhite communities.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200603/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. Biden decries Trump’s show of force, vows to heal, unite

His criminal justice reform plan, released last summer, lacks many of the proposals that
were part of the 2016 Democratic Party platform, including the training of officers to avoid
use of force, required use of body cameras and federal investigations of all police shoot-
ings.

Biden’s speech repeated some promises, including establishing a police oversight com-
mission and encouraging departments to embrace community policing programs. He said
that every police department needs to undergo a comprehensive review of its hiring prac-
tices, training programs and de-escalation tactics — and that the federal government
should give cities and states “the tools and the resources they need to implement re-
forms.”

“Bad cops should be dealt with severely and swiftly,” he said. “We all need to take a hard
look at the culture that allows for the senseless tragedies to keep happening. And we need
to learn from the cities and the precincts that are getting it right.”

Apart from his call for a ban on chokeholds, Biden largely posited that the way to end con-
tinuing abuses was not to create a sheaf of new proposals but to enact measures that have
long been debated and never pursued.

“It’s going to take more than talk. We’ve had talk before,” Biden said, implicitly criticizing
his generation of political leaders.

“The contrast is his greatest strength. ... Compare that with the fake John Wayne persona
from Trump.” Roland Martin, African American activist and radio host

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200603/page/1/textview 4/4
