2020. 6. 17. Teens ‘exploited’

Teens ‘exploited’

The Dallas Morning News - 6 Jun 2020 - 1A - By TOM STEELE Staff Writer tsteele@dallasnews.com Twitter: @tomsteele

protests to steal guns, police say.

is

Two teenagers face federal charges and a third person was still at large after authorities
say they “exploited the chaos” of Dallas protests to steal dozens of handguns from a
Stemmons Corridor store.

Demonte Tretion Kelly, 18, and Lejael Justus Rudley, 19, were taken into custody Wednes-
day on one count each of possession of stolen firearms and theft from a federal firearms li-
censee.

Three men pried open the side door of DFW Gun Range, at 1607 W. Mockingbird Lane,
about 1:40 a.m. Sunday, according to a criminal complaint.

One grabbed rifles off the wall while the other two smashed open glass cases containing
handguns. In 80 seconds, they left the store with 43 handguns and three rifles, authorities
said. An anonymous tip led authorities to surveil Kelly, who was staying at a southeast Oak
Cliff motel, the complaint says, with Rudley in an adjoining room.

Dallas police performed a traffic stop Wednesday afternoon on Kelly and Rudley, and offi-
cers reported finding one of the stolen handguns in the vehicle.

Both admitted taking part in the gunstore burglary, the complaint says, and authorities
found several more stolen weapons in their motel rooms. Kelly also said he’d sold one of
the guns, the complaint says.

If convicted, they each face up to 20 years in federal prison.

A third suspect remained at large.

Anyone with information may contact the federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms
and Explosives at 8882838477 or atftips@atf.gov.

Saturday night and early Sunday, police focused their attention on downtown Dallas, de-
ploying tear gas and arresting dozens as more than 1,000 protesters marched through the
streets demanding an end to police brutality.

“Theft of firearms will always trigger swift law enforcement action,” U.S. Attorney Erin
Nealy Cox said in a written statement about the arrests in the gun case. “This prosecution
sends a message: Federal law enforcement will not allow criminals to use the turmoil fac-
ing our city as cover for their own lawless ends.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200606/page/1/textview 4/1
