2020. 6. 17. Deaths hit 400,000

Deaths hit 400,000

Hardhit Brazil says it will stop giving updates on deaths

The Dallas Morning News - 8 Jun 2020 - 1A - By JOSEPH WILSON

The confirmed global death toll from the COVID19 virus reached at least 400,000 fatalities
on Sunday.

   
   
  

ig es

co; Re
We? Rac Sse
BARCELONA, Spain — The confirmed global death toll from the COVID19 virus reached at
least 400,000 fatalities on Sunday, a day after the government of Brazil broke with stan-
dard public health protocols by ceasing to publish updates of the number of deaths and in-
fections in the hardhit South American country.

Worldwide, at least 6.9 million people have been infected by the virus, according to Johns
Hopkins University, whose aggregated tally has become the main worldwide reference for
monitoring the disease. Its running counter says the United States leads the world with
nearly 110,000 confirmed virusrelated deaths. Europe as a whole has recorded more than
175,000 since the virus emerged in China late last year.

Health experts, however, believe that the John Hopkins tally falls short of showing the true
tragedy of the pandemic.

Many governments have struggled to produce statistics that can reasonably be considered
as true indicators of the pandemic given the scarcity of diagnostic tests especially in the
first phase of the crisis. Authorities in Italy and Spain, with over 60,000 combined deaths,
have acknowledged that their death count is larger than the story the numbers tell.
Brazil’s government has stopped publishing a running total of coronavirus deaths and in-
fections.

Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro went as far as to tweet Saturday that his country’s dis-
ease totals are “not representative” of Brazil’s situation, insinuating that the numbers
were actually overestimating the spread of the virus.

Critics of Bolsonaro, who has repeatedly clashed with health experts over the seriousness
of the disease and has threatened to take Brazil out of the World Health Organization, said
the decision was a maneuver to hide the depths of crisis.

Brazil’s last official numbers recorded over 34,000 virusrelated deaths, the thirdhighest
toll in the world behind the U.S. and Britain. It reported nearly 615,000 infections, putting
it second behind the U.S.

After Bolsonaro stoked his clash with health experts, Pope Francis cautioned people in
countries emerging from lockdown to keep following authorities’ rules on social distanc-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200608/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Deaths hit 400,000

ing, hygiene and limits on movement.

“Be careful, don’t cry victory, don’t cry victory too soon,” Francis said. “Follow the rules.
They are rules that help us to avoid the virus getting ahead.”

On Sunday, the U.K. revealed that places of worship can reopen starting June 15 — but only
for private prayer.

Worries have surfaced over the past couple of weeks that Prime Minister Boris Johnson’s
government is easing the restrictions too soon, with new infections potentially still run-
ning at 8,000 a day. As things stand, nonessential shops, including department stores, are
due to reopen June 15.

Professor John Edmunds, who attends meetings of the British government’s Scientific Ad-
visory Group for Emergencies, said the epidemic “is definitely not all over.”

In France, the government announced that starting Tuesday, it will ease restrictions limit-
ing travel from the French mainland to overseas territories in the Caribbean and Indian
Ocean.

Spain is preparing to take another step forward in the scaling back of its containment with
Madrid and Barcelona opening the interiors of restaurants with reduced seating on
Monday.

In Turkey, Istanbul residents flocked to the city’s shores and parks on the first weekend
with no lockdown, prompting a reprimand from the health minister.

Russia remained troubling, with nearly 9,000 new cases over the past day.

Pakistan is pushing toward 100,000 confirmed infections as medical professionals plead
for more controls and greater enforcement of social distancing directives. But Prime Min-
ister Imran Khan said a full shutdown would devastate a failing economy.

India confirmed 9,971 new coronavirus cases in another biggest singleday spike, a day be-
fore it prepares to reopen shopping malls, hotels and religious places after a 10week lock-
down.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200608/page/1/textview 2/2
