2020. 6. 17. EUROPEAN protesters show solidarity with their U.S. counterparts.

EUROPEAN protesters show solidarity with their U.S. coun-
terparts.

The Dallas Morning News - 14 Jun 2020 - 1A - By RUSS BYNUM and ED WHITE

Antiracism protesters on Saturday sought to call attention to the deaths of two more black

men — one who was found hanging from a tree in California and another who was fatally

shot by police outside an Atlanta restaurant. The Atlanta police chief resigned hours later.
i ¥ . i a

al be

  

Meanwhile in Europe, farright activists scuffled with police in London and Paris as more
Black Lives Matter demonstrations unfolded nearly three weeks after George Floyd, an-
other black man, died at the hands of a white Minneapolis police officer who pressed a
knee to his neck.

Atlanta police were called late Friday about a man said to be sleeping in a car blocking a
Wendy’s restaurant drivethrough. The Georgia Bureau of Investigation was investigating
reports that 27yearold Rayshard Brooks failed a sobriety test and was shot in a struggle
over a police Taser.

In Palmdale, Calif., hundreds of people marched to demand an investigation into the death
of 24yearold Robert Fuller, who was found hanging from a tree early Wednesday near City
Hall. The protesters marched from where the body was found to a sheriff’s station, with
many carrying signs that said “Justice for Robert Fuller.”

Authorities said the death appeared to be a suicide, but an autopsy was planned. The city
said there were no outdoor cameras that could have recorded what happened.

European protesters sought to show solidarity with their American counterparts and to
confront bias in their own countries. The demonstrations also posed a challenge to policies
intended to limit crowds to prevent the spread of the coronavirus.

In Paris, police stopped protesters from confronting farright activists who unfurled a huge
banner from a building denouncing “antiwhite racism.” The banner was partly torn down
by residents in the building, with one raising a fist in victory.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200614/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. EUROPEAN protesters show solidarity with their U.S. counterparts.

A Black Lives Matter group in London called off a demonstration, saying the presence of
counterprotesters would make it unsafe. Rightwing activists and soccer fans descended on
the U.K. capital, saying they wanted to guard historical monuments that have been tar-
geted by antiracism protesters.

Many gathered around the statue of wartime Prime Minister Winston Churchill and the
Cenotaph war memorial, which were boarded up Friday to protect them from vandalism.
Officials feared farright activists would seek confrontations with antiracism protesters un-
der the guise of protecting statues.

The statue of Churchill had been daubed with the words “was a racist.” Prime Minister
Boris Johnson called Churchill a hero but acknowledged that he “sometimes expressed
opinions that were and are unacceptable to us today.“

Some activists threw bottles and cans at officers, while others tried to push through police
barriers. The mostly white crowd chanted “England” and sang the national anthem while
riot police on horses pushed them back.

Arally in Paris drew 15,000, led by supporters of Adama Traore, a French black man who
died in police custody in 2016. No one has been charged in his death. Police fired tear gas
and blocked people from marching.

An enormous portrait showed one face with images of Floyd and Traore. Banners strung
between trees around Republique plaza bore the names of dozens of others who have died
or suffered violence at the hands of French police.

Myriam Boicoulin, 31, who was born on the French Caribbean island of Martinique, said
she marched because she wanted to be heard.

As a black woman living in mainland France, she said, “I’m constantly obliged to adapt, to
make compromises, not make waves — to be almost white, in fact.”

“It’s the first time people see us,” Boicoulin said. “Let us breathe.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200614/page/1/textview 2/2
