2020. 6. 17. MAVERICKS’ presence at vigil spoke volumes.

MAVERICKS’ presence at vigil spoke volumes.

The Dallas Morning News - 1 Jun 2020 - 1A - Twitter: @Townbrad

They wore masks, like most others who attended Sunday’s vigil outside Dallas Police
headquarters, but as tall professional basketball players they naturally were conspicuous
among the peaceful throng. —

   
 

we Be ee
That was more than fine by Mavericks Dwight Powell, Justin Jackson, Jalen Brunson and
Maxi Kleber. And by Mavericks owner Mark Cuban, who tends to stand out in any crowd.
Sunday’s gathering was about honoring the memory of George Floyd, having honest dia-
logue about police brutality and racial injustice and taking steps to heal — collectively.
“This is our community; our country,” Cuban told The News. “Both are hurting. I wanted
to be here to listen. To understand better the pain the AfricanAmerican community is go-
ing through. And to show that the Mavs organization will be here to help.”
Cuban wore a black Mavericks Tshirt with blue lettering. He’s been a Dallas resident since
1982, an apolitical community leader since buying the
Mavericks in 2000 — and in recent months a local and national voice of reason during the
coronavirus pandemic.
Powell has been a Maverick since 2015, and Kleber, Brunson and Jackson have had shorter
tenures, but their presence alone Sunday spoke volumes.
After listening to the prayers and speeches, AfricanAmericans Powell, Brunson and Jack-
son spoke to The News about why they came to the vigil and what they took from it.
It had been six days since Floyd died in Minneapolis after a white police officer pinned him
to the street with a knee in his neck. Some pro and college athletes and coaches have spo-
ken out on social media, some teams and leagues have issued statements.
Few in the sports world have stepped out and been part of a public gathering the way the
Mavericks contingent did on Sunday.
“T think it’s important for anybody who cares about justice and the things that are going
on in this city and the things that have been going on in this country for a long time,”
Powell said, when asked why he came.
“It’s important to be a part of the conversation,” he added. “I think Mark has done a great
job in his leadership of us and showing us that we have a voice. To be able to be here and
hear the voice of the community — share their opinions and thoughts and feelings — it
was very important for us to be here today.”
The NBA has been on hiatus since the night of March 11, when, during the Mavericks

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200601/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. MAVERICKS’ presence at vigil spoke volumes.

Denver game at American Airlines Center it was learned that Utah center Rudy Gobert
tested positive for the coronavirus.

On Thursday of this week, NBA owners are expected to decide how and when the season
will resume, most likely in late July. Sunday, though, was not about basketball. It was about
Floyd and, yes, the manner of his death, which has triggered both peaceful and destructive
protests across the country.

For many, the persisting incidences of wrongful AfricanAmerican deaths while in the cus-
tody of law enforcement trigger a range of emotions, from sorrow to rage.

“It’s very unfortunate that all of these events have happened,” Brunson said. “But I think
it’s very important to use my platform, not just to be known as a basketball player, but to
be able to help shed light on the situation.

“T want to bring awareness. I want to not just be here, but try to help promote change.
Most importantly I’m glad that Mark is the owner that he is and that he’s allowing us to be
vocal and be present in these situations. He gave us the confidence to actually come out
here.”

Brunson, 23, said he knows most if not all of the rest of the Mavericks players would have
come on Sunday, if able.

“T’m really thankful that we have the group of guys that we do,” he said. “And that we all
know that we have to somehow inspire change.

“We need to continue to get better. I know that God has his pace. We’ve just got to continue
to follow his pace, follow his lead and go from there.”

Jackson, 25, was born in Houston, the same hometown as Floyd. Jackson said he appreci-
ated the peaceful nature and honest dialogue of Sunday’s gathering and the ability “for
people to get out and let some emotions out.

“When it comes to things like this, injustice and racism and things that go into this,” he
added, “I think it’s very important to people to stand up for what’s right, for there to be
some sort of change to happen.”

Powell noted not only the diversity of the people who gathered, but also their opinions.
“People of different races, creeds, sharing a space and understanding that it’s about all of
us, and that we’re all in this together,” he said. “That there is a problem and we need to
heal. We need to find solutions as a community.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200601/page/1/textview 2/2
