2020. 6. 17. Trump escalates social media spat

Trump escalates social media spat
President signs order to try to control ‘unchecked power’

The Dallas Morning News - 29 May 2020 - 1A - FROM WIRE REPORTS

WASHINGTON — President Donald Trump signed an executive order Thursday targeting
social media companies such as Twitter, accusing them of having “unchecked power” and
escalating his feud with the same technology platforms he’s using as a political bullhorn in
an election year.

“We're fed up with it,” he said in the Oval Office.

The president has little power to modify federal rules without an act of Congress, but his
actions — if upheld by the courts, which is far from assured — could increase political and
financial pressure on social media companies by opening the door to lawsuits and regula-
tory reviews.

Trump waved off questions about whether he was overstepping his authority with the or-
der, saying, “I guess it’s going to be challenged in court, but what isn’t?”

The move came two days after Twitter added a disclaimer to two Trump tweets that falsely
said mailin ballots led to widespread voter fraud. Although Twitter did not delete his
tweets, the president accused it of censor

ship — lashing out on Twitter.

Last month, Twitter began a “Get the Facts” label to direct social media users to news arti-
cles from trusted outlets next to tweets containing misleading or disputed information
about the virus.

“So ridiculous to see Twitter trying to make the case that Mailin Ballots are not subject to
FRAUD,” he tweeted Thursday. “How stupid, there are examples, & cases, all over the
place. Our election process will become badly tainted & a laughingstock all over the
World.”

Section 230

Under the First Amendment, the government cannot ban or censor free speech. But Twitter
is not the government, and Section 230 of a 1996 federal law called the Communications
Decency Act specifically protects internet companies from lawsuits or other liability for
moderating content posted by users, or for the content itself.

In his executive order, Trump aims to modify the scope of Section 230.

If a company edits content — apart from restricting posts that are violent, obscene or ha-
rassing — “it is engaged in editorial conduct” and “forfeits any protection” under the law,
according to a draft version of the president’s order posted online by Kate Klonick, a pro-
fessor at St. John’s University School of Law in

New York.

The order directs Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross to request new regulations from the
Federal Communications Commission to determine whether a social media company is
acting “in good faith” to moderate content.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200529/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Trump escalates social media spat

Advocates for the tech sector, lawmakers in Congress and a variety of legal experts from
across the political spectrum Thursday doubted the legality of Trump’s draft proposal and
feared its implications for free speech.

“This is simply setting the wheels of law enforcement and regulation in motion against a
private company for questioning the president,” said Matt Schruers, president of the
Computer and Communications Industry Association, a Washington trade group that rep-
resents Facebook, Google and other major tech companies.

Under the draft order, U.S. Attorney General William Barr would work with state attorneys
general to determine whether companies are violating any state laws. In addition, the
White House would collect complaints about alleged online censorship and other unfair
practices, then forward them to the Justice Department and the Federal Trade Commission
for possible legal action.

‘Not the answer’

The order marks the White House’s most significant salvo against Silicon Valley after years
of verbal broadsides and regulatory threats from Trump and his top deputies. It also may
raise fresh, thorny questions about the First Amendment, the future of expression online
and the extent to which the White House can properly — and legally — influence the deci-
sions that private companies make about their apps, sites and services.

It is not clear, however, if the FTC and FCC plan to take the actions sought by the president.
The agencies are independent, operating separately of Trump’s Cabinet, leaving enforce-
ment to their discretion. The FCC declined to comment, and the FTC did not immediately
respond.

Jessica Rosenworcel, a Democratic FCC commissioner, blasted the draft order Thursday as
unworkable. “Social media can be frustrating,” she said in a statement. “But an executive
order that would turn the Federal Communications Commission into the president’s
speech police is not the answer.”

Others fretted the proposal Trump signed threatens to circumvent Congress. “The idea you
could have an executive order that reinterprets a clear statute that Congress passed, that
has been interpreted by the courts for over 20plus years, as recently as yesterday ... is just
nonsense,” said Jesse Blumenthal, who leads tech policy work for Stand Together, an or-
ganization backed by industrialist Charles Koch.

The White House declined to comment. Trump late Wednesday accused tech giants of try-
ing to censor conservatives ahead of the 2020 election, and Thursday he added on Twitter,
“This will be a Big Day for Social Media and FAIRNESS!”

Los Angeles Times, The Washington Post,

The Associated Press

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200529/page/1/textview 2/2
