2020. 6. 18. STEEL AND GLASS

STEEL AND GLASS
Mural inspired by “Coriolanus” will grace a downtown parking garage

The Oklahoman : 27 May 2020 - A1 - By Steve Lackmeyer Business Writer slackmeyer@oklahoman.com

A five-story mural is set to add some color to an 1,100space garage being built in connec-
tion with the Oklahoma City Convention Center, the Omni Hotel and Scissortail Park.

  

The mural, by glass artist Martin Donlin, will wrap the the south, east and west walls of the
garage under construction in the new Park Union District. The project, commissioned ear-
lier this year, is a partnership between Embark and the Oklahoma City Office of Arts and
Cultural Affairs and is funded through the

city's 1% for Arts initiative.

The installation, “What Is The City But The People,” is described by Donlin as hailing from
William Shakespeare's play“Coriolanus .” His mural will use multiple layers of pattern and
imagery exhibited through the placement of polycarbonate tiles and fastened to steel ca-
bles spanning from the second to the sixth floor of the parking garage.

Donlin said his design will we ave together an eclectic mix of cultural and natural ele-
ments, with inspiration drawn from both the ancient and modern worlds.

He said Oklahoma City architecture and traditional Native American textile patterns all
contribute to the final design, an ode to Oklahoma City and the modern public square.

“T was r eally excited to be selected for such a monumental and groundbreaking art com-
mission,” said Donlin, who lives in Brighton, England. “The techniques to create the art-
work have never been used before. I have visited Oklahoma City on several occasions, and I
am so enthusiastic to contribute to such a wonderful collection of public art.”

The garage, convention center and Omni are set to be completed later this year.

The 240-unit, eight-story Boulevard Place apartments and retail, meanwhile, are still on
track to be adjoining the north side of the garage. Both the apartments and Chesapeake
Energy Arena visitors will have access to the garage.

The mural will be a part of the future “4th Street Experience,” a road that extends between
the convention center and the 17-story Omni Hotel. It's a critical path between the two

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/20200527/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. STEEL AND GLASS

destinations, one where trade shows might spill out onto the street t hanks t o garage-
style doors on the north side of the convention center that will open out onto SW 4 just east
of Robinson Avenue.

The “experience” and the mural are funded through MAPS 4. The street design will bea
series a series of louvered shade structures, somewhat similar to trees,

that create a virtual canopy over the street. They will be built at varying heights, providing
shade during the day and protection during rainy days. At night, colored lights placed atop
and underneath the structures will create the so-called “experience.”

Installation of the mural is set to begin in mid-September with completion in November.
“From our first collaboration, we quickly saw how public art humanizes our buildings,”
said Jason Ferbrache, Embark director. “Through art, we can help support the cultural
identity of our community while connecting our visitors with the tenacious spirit of Okla-
homa City. This facility will serve as a gateway into downtown Oklahoma City, and
Martin's art helps tell our beautiful story.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/20200527/page/1/textview 2/2
