2020. 6. 17. Trump to talk race, policing

Trump to talk race, policing
But key Dallas leaders left off invite list for event before $10M fundraiser

The Dallas Morning News - 11 Jun 2020: 1A - By TODD J. GILLMAN and GROMER JEFFERS JR. Staff Writers

WASHINGTON — President Donald Trump plans a conversation about race relations and
policing Thursday in Dallas, during a trip built around a highdollar fundraising dinner ex-

pected to bring in $10 million.
= = _ =

    

 

His first campaign foray since the COVID19 pandemic began three months ago comes amid
economic malaise and fallout from a police killing last month. There’s also uncertainty
over Texas’ political direction, with polls showing Trump in a fight to hang on to a state
that Republicans haven’t lost since 1976.

The White House said the president will announce a plan for “holistic revitalization and
recovery” at a roundtable with “faith leaders, law enforcement officials, and small busi-
ness owners to discuss solutions to historic economic, health, and justice disparities in
American communities.”

Dallas Police Chief U. Reneé Hall, Dallas County Sheriff Marian Brown and District Attorney
John Creuzot — all of whom are black — were not invited.

“Chief Hall has not received an invitation for a meeting in conjunction with the President’s
visit to Dallas. Her schedule Thursday is already completely full with a priority to prepare a
final report to the City Manager regarding deci

sions made during protests in the city,” an aide said.

Mayor Eric Johnson, who also is black, was invited “but he had to politely decline because
of prior obligations,” an aide said.

The event will take place at Gateway Church’s campus in North Dallas, according to an in-
vitation obtained by The Dallas Morning News —a conservative evangelical megachurch
with a predominantly white congregation, led by senior pastor Robert Morris, one of
Trump’s outside religious advisers.

Stepping in

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 1/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. Trump to talk race, policing

Like other cities, Dallas has seen protests since the death of George Floyd under the knee of
a Minneapolis police officer, and challenges stemming from the pandemic.

Trump has inserted himself into the local conversation on both fronts to a surprising de-
gree.

When Dallas salon owner Shelley Luther defied state, county and court orders to remain
closed during the outbreak, Trump urged Dallas voters to oust state District Judge Eric
Moyé for tossing her in jail for contempt of court — a rare, if not unprecedented instance
of a president weighing in on a local judicial race.

With protests after the Floyd killing roiling the country, Trump invoked a bizarre con-
frontation in Dallas involving a man with a machete to justify sending federal troops to
quell protests.

The White House has not disclosed a guest list for the Dallas roundtable.

On Monday, Trump held a similar roundtable at the White House with the head of the In-
ternational Association of Chiefs of Police, the police chief in Buffalo Grove, Ill., and
others, including the president of the Fraternal Order of Police, the nation’s largest police
union.

Presidents routinely include an “official” element in campaign travel, allowing the use of
taxpayer funds to subsidize the substantial costs of Air Force One and presidential security.
Top-dollar event

Trump’s dinner at an undisclosed private home is expected to include about 25 guests. For
$580,600, two people can dine and get a picture taken with him, according to an invitation
obtained by The News.

But guests can pay up to $580,600 each, the most allowed under current campaign rules
because of the way Trump Victory is structured, as a partnership between the reelection
campaign, Republican National Committee and 22 state parties.

The president will hold a similar event on Saturday at his golf club in Bedminster, N_J., af-
ter delivering a commencement address at West Point.

“Any time the president comes to town it’s a good thing,” said state Rep. Matt Shaheen, R-
plano. “It fires up the base.”

Trump Victory will cover costs of COVID19 testing for dinner guests by the White House
Medical Unit.

Texas Democrats called the event seamy, given unrest in the wake of a Minneapolis police
killing — Floyd, was buried Tuesday in Houston — along with widespread unemployment
and an ongoing pandemic with a death toll that now tops 112,700 in the United States,
which accounts for more than one in four coronavirus deaths globally.

“Right now, Trump appears to be more toxic than his usual fairly toxic self. His response
to the coronavirus in hard hit communities of color has been awful. And now he is further-
ing his authoritarian ways with his fullthroated support of police violence against Black
Lives Matter supporters,” said Matt Barreto, cofounder of Latino Decisions, a polling com-
pany.

Itching to campaign

Dallas was among a halfdozen cities RNC officials considered since North Carolina’s gov-
ernor refused to commit to a fullsize event while the risk of contagion remains high. But

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 1/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. Trump to talk race, policing

Dallas County Judge Clay Jenkins and Mayor Eric Johnson, both Democrats, also cite public
health restrictions. Jenkins ruled out an event that big, and reportedly, the RNC has tenta-
tively settled on Jacksonville, Fla.

Trump has been eager to return to the stump.

The Dallas dinner marks his first campaign travel in three months. But he told reporters
Wednesday that he’ll resume holding rallies starting in Tulsa on June 19 — Juneteenth, a
day celebrated as the official end of slavery in the United States.

Detractors called the choice tone deaf at a time of racial strife, recalling the twoday Tulsa
Race Massacre in 1921, when a white mob killed hundreds of black residents.

At his last rally, Feb. 28 in Charleston, S.C., Trump called growing warnings of a looming
coronavirus crisis a Democratic “hoax.” At the time, the

United States had seen just 59 confirmed cases and two deaths.

The White House, framing the discussion planned for Dallas, cited “historic lows in mi-
nority unemployment, criminal justice reform, increasing school choice,” and Trump’s
support for improving neglected communities through Opportunity Zones and Project Safe
Neighborhoods.

“He will ... hear from national and local leaders about ways the private and public sector
can work together to uplift our most vulnerable communities. The United States of Amer-
ica is known for its resilience and strength, and together, we can all be a part of the great
American Comeback,” the White House said.

During previous Dallas visits, Trump has been greeted warmly by supporters — and by
heckling protesters. In October 2017, chants of “liar, liar" and “Go home Cheeto” rang out
downtown as he collected $4 million from donors.

Ed Espinoza, executive director of Progress Texas, said activists considered throwing
Trump an “unwelcome reception” but “there are just so many huge issues right now. Ev-
erybody’s been focused on local reforms and Black Lives Matter.”

Not Trump country

Trump has friends in Dallas, including investor Tommy Hicks Jr., cochair of the RNC and a
close friend of Donald Trump Jr. Hicks is cohosting the dinner.

But Dallas is not Trump country, and Texas is no longer safe Republican turf.

Hillary Clinton beat him 6135 in the county even as he collected 52% statewide, in a 9point
win that represented the worst showing for a Republican in Texas since 1976, when Carter
ousted Gerald Ford.

Democrats see North Texas as a place to pad their majority in Congress, and gain ground
needed to seize the

Texas House. Republicans lost North Texas legislative seats in 2018, along with a congres-
sional district held for decades by Republican Pete Sessions.

In 2016 and 2018, Democrats gained ground thanks to higher Hispanic and black turnout,
and a declining share of the white vote for Republicans. Beto O’rourke held Sen. Ted Cruz
to a 3point win in 2018, the closest any Democrat had come in a statewide race since 1994.
Trump remains polarizing — still popular with his diehard base but losing ground with
suburban women and others who put him over the top in 2016.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 1/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. Trump to talk race, policing

Recent polls show former Vice President Joe Biden narrowly leading Trump in Texas, or
tied.

“Nobody wants him here,” said Royce Brooks, executive director of Annie’s List, a group
that supports progressive women candidates for the Texas House. “If Republicans here are
smart, they are distancing themselves from him, and his coming to town will not be help-
ful for that exercise.”

Dallas County Republican Party chairman Rodney Anderson said Trump’s visit can only
help, though.

“The president is always welcomed in Dallas County,” he said. “With Republicans, there’s
no question the president is popular. The folks that are with him continue to be with him
— and will be with him all the way through November. Most of our activists are fired up
and ready to go.”

His counterpart, Dallas County Democratic chairwoman Carol Donovan, said Trump was
using Dallas as an “ATM machine” and should “start putting the American people first,
instead of himself.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 1/page/1/textview 4/4
