2020. 6. 18. NBA'S BACK?

NBA'S BACK?

NBA owners are set to approve a plan for the season to restart with 22
teams in Orlando, Florida

The Oklahoman « 4 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Jeff Zillgitt USA TODAY

NBA owners set to approve plan to resume season with 22 teams in Florida

      

|

NBA Commissioner Adam Silver and other high-ranking NBA officials plan to propose a
finish to the 2019-20 season that includes 22 teams, a play-in tournament for the final
seeds in each conference and a 16-team playoff at the ESPN Wide World of Sports Complex
just outside of Orlando, Florida, a person with knowledge of the details told USA TODAY
Sports.

The person requested anonymity because he was not authorized to speak publicly until
owners vote on the

proposal. That is expected to happen Thursday at the NBA's Board of Governors video con-
ference. It requires

three-fourths owners' approval, and owners are expected to approve the plan.

Also, there remains a chance that discussion evolve son the video conference and a vote
does not take place. If owners vote in favor of this plan, the National Basketball Players As-
sociation must ratify it to resume play.

The plan is the cul mination of discussions, feedback and input that combines thebes tb
alan ce of competing principles while prioriti zing player health, the person said.

While Silver has acknowledged that no plan will be perfect, there are financial reasons on
both sides to finish the season.

The 22 teams will includeninefromtheEastern Conference and 13 and from the
Western Conference.

In the East: Milwaukee, Toronto, Boston, Miami, [ndiana,Philadelphia,Brookl
yn, Orlandoand Washington.

In the West: Los Angeles Lakers, LosAngeles Clippers, Denver, Utah, Oklahoma
City, Houston, Dallas, Memphis, Portland, New Orleans, Sacramento, San Antonio and

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/20200604/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. NBA'S BACK?

Phoenix.

The plan also includes an eight- game fi nish t o t he regular season, then a playin tourna-
ment for the eighth seed in both conferences. If the ninth seed is not within f our g a mes of
t he eig ht seed, there won't be a playin game in that conference. If there is a play-in
game, it will be double elimination for the eighth seed and single elimination for the ninth
seed.

Thesportscomplexlocatedamongseveral

Disney properties in cent ral Florida has multiple courts t o f acilit ates ev - eral gamesa
day. Imagine Thursday- Fri day NCAA Tournament-style action every day through the end
of the regular season and first round of the playoffs.

While a fluid situation, teams could report to the complex in July for a 2 1/2 week-style
training camp before games begin in late July. With a playoff stretchthatcouldexten
dinto October, the two finalists could end up spending close to three months in a single
location under restrictive health and safety guidelines.

The NBA suspended its season March 11 when Utah J azz center Rudy Gobert tested positive
for coronavirus ( COVID- 19) . At least 10 NBA players tested positive.

Silver and league officials have been adamant that the health and safety of players are
paramount when it comes to a return. While some details are being finalized, it is expected
there will be regular, if not daily, testing for COVID.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/20200604/page/1/textview 2/2
