2020. 6. 17. Neglected by Brazil's government, favelas battle the virus themselves

Neglected by Brazil’s government, favelas battle the virus
themselves

Country’s hardest-hit communities are hiring ambulances, tracking cases
and collecting funds as Bolsonaro stalls

The Washington Post - 11 Jun 2020 - A1 - BY MARINA LOPES

When the president of Viela da Harmonia walks down the street, her constituents take
note. An elderly neighbor needs groceries. A mother is looking for diapers. Another family
asks for soap.

 

Just weeks ago, Laryssa da Silva didn’t know where her next meal would come from. Now
the 24-year-old single mother is responsible for making sure the 70 families who live on
her street survive Brazil’s coronavirus outbreak.

Da Silva is one of 400 new “street presidents” in Paraisépolis, responsible for helping her
neighbors in Sado Paulo’s largest slum secure food, aid and health care.

The program, created as cases in Latin America’s largest country began to ex

The “street presidents” of Paraisdpolis, a favela in Sado Paulo, Brazil, meet to discuss re-
sponses to the coronavirus. Latin America has been declared the pandemic’s new hot spot.
plode, is one of many solutions the people of Brazil’s low-income favelas have found to
bypass a divided government response to a worsening health crisis. Community leaders in
some of the country’s hardest-hit neighborhoods are hiring their own ambulances, creat-
ing unemployment funds and even building independent databases to track cases and
deaths.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200611/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Neglected by Brazil's government, favelas battle the virus themselves

While Asia, Europe and the United States are attempting to reopen from long coronavirus
lockdowns, cases in Latin America are exploding. The World Health Organization reported
more than 136,000 new cases worldwide on Sunday, a record.

The WHO has declared Latin America the pandemic’s new hot spot. Brazil has reported
more than 772,000 cases, second only to the United States, and more than

39,000 deaths. But the official numbers are highly contested; epidemiologists believe ac-
tual cases and deaths are substantially higher.

Da Silva lost her restaurant job in March. Within weeks, she could no longer afford to feed
her children, ages 2 and 5. She was staring at her pantry one afternoon in April, down to
her last scoop of beans, when a neighbor rang her doorbell to beg for flour to tide over her
own children for one more day.

“That was the moment when I said I have to do something,” she said. “It became more
important to help others than to be scared.”

The virus has struck Brazil’s poor, mostly black favelas disproportionately. In Sao Paulo,
people who live in poorer areas and contract the virus are up to 10 times more likely to die
than people in wealthy areas, according to data released by the city’s health department.
Black Sao Paulo residents are 62 percent more likely to die from the virus than white resi-
dents.

Doctors blame Brazil’s rising death toll in part on the government’s divided response.
Even as cases spiked, President Jair Bolsonaro denounced social isolation measures im-
posed by governors and joined protests calling for the economy to reopen. He’s on his third
health minister since the start of the crisis; the first two refused to back his calls to end so-
cial distancing measures and push hydroxychloroquine treatments.

“We regret all the deaths,” Bolsonaro told reporters. “But it’s everybody’s destiny.”

Many in Brazil’s slums are rejecting that fate.

Favelas have long been cradles of activism. Many have been overrun by violent criminal
gangs that impose restrictions on who can enter and leave. Cut off from government ser-
vices, informal communities have often created parallel institutions — including mail, In-
ternet and sanitation systems — and supplemented weak health and education systems.
That tradition of creative problem-solving has spread during the outbreak. When the peo-
ple of Rio de Janeiro’s Complexo do Alemao favela saw that the city’s coronavirus statistics
were leaving out cases from slums, they created their own database to track the disease.
The residents’ association in Rio’s Cantagalo community joined with a local nongovern-
mental organization to spray disinfectant.

After 20-year-old Juliana Carmo saw messages spreading on social media telling the peo-
ple of Rio’s Honério Gurgel neighborhood that warm climates would curb the coronavirus
and that donated masks were contaminated with the virus, she teamed up with other
young people around Rio to map and combat fake news.

They produced a video addressing the most common misinformation and established a
hotline to help people vet claims.

“We have always suffered from a lack of information,” Carmo said. “Truthful and reliable
news is more important now than ever.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200611/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Neglected by Brazil's government, favelas battle the virus themselves

Da Silva signed up online to represent Viela da Harmonia — “Harmony Alley” — an un-
paved road that weaves through Paraisopolis, a sprawling slum of 100,000. Each day, she
ventures out among the plywood and tin houses to deliver masks and alcohol gel, check for
covid-19 symptoms and sign up hungry families to receive donations.

The program provided her with a six-hour first-aid course led by the local fire depart-
ment, which showed her how to monitor the progression of the virus, when to call an am-
bulance and how to help patients suffering from severe symptoms.

Gilson Rodrigues, president of the residents’ association in Paraisépolis, saw cases start-
ing to climb in March. He knew that slums like his, where families are packed tightly to-
gether and many have no choice but to continue working, would be ravaged. He started the
street president program to closely monitor and slow the spread of the virus.

‘“‘We decided to create alternatives so that if the government didn’t do its job, we would be
able to mobilize to prevent suffering in the community,” he said.

Rodrigues organized several dozen volunteers to make masks, converted the neighbor-
hood’s closed schools and gyms into isolation wards and established an online platform on
which unemployed residents can apply for financial aid.

After residents complained that the government was not responding to emergency calls in
the slums, the association hired a 24-hour ambulance exclusively for the neighborhood.
To pay for the projects, the association started social media crowdfunding campaigns that
brought in thousands of dollars.

Sandra Jovchelovitch, a social psychologist at the London School of Economics, studies the
role of resilience and identity in grass-roots organizing in favelas. She has worked with the
United Nations to spread bottom-up development — people finding solutions for them-
selves where the state has faltered — to Africa and the Middle East.

She believes that low-income communities in the United States and Europe can learn from
the favelas’ response.

“The pandemic will never be defeated through top-down policies,” Jovchelovitch said.
“There needs to be community-rooted action.

“In this way, favelas have a lot to teach the North.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200611/page/1/textview 3/3
