2020. 6. 17. PGA tees off at Colonial, sans fans

PGA tees off at Colonial, sans fans

The Dallas Morning News - 11 Jun 2020 - 1A - TIM COWLISHAW wicowlishaw@dallasnews.com

Ican’t tell you the first time I attended the Byron Nelson, but I do recall Arnold Palmer
making eagle on his first hole, the downhill par5 10th at Preston Trail. So it has been a
minute.

 

The first golf tournament I covered was the 1979 Nelson, walking every hole in the final
round with Tom

Watson as he won for the third time. I don’t go back nearly as far with the Colonial, but I
was certainly on hand 17 years ago when Annika Sorenstam’s nervous tee shot on the 10th
hole made its own slice of ceilingbusting golf history.

I can’t remember the last time I was this ready to see golf played at Colonial. Probably
never. And that’s despite the fact I can only watch on TV with the rest of you since the
tournament that kickstarts the PGA Tour season Thursday will be played in front of no fans
and very few members of the media.

Some years the Colonial gets lost, not only in the golf calendar — unable to draw a select
field because of Jack Nicklaus’ Memorial tournament played a

week later — but in the sports calendar. Too many NBA and Stanley Cup playoff games be-
ing played that particular weekend in May, maybe even a Rangersred Sox series or some-
thing that limits the time we have for golf.

Not in 2020. Not this weekend.

It’s time. And I don’t say that in any political way at all. I will leave the answers to when
sports should return on a global scale to the experts, quite divided themselves as they
wrestle with the mysteries of the pandemic. I mean, simply, it feels like time to watch
some live sports without fans that can actually work. I’ve already seen plenty that strug-
gled.

I will say that boxing on ESPN Tuesday night with a very small group of officials seated
near ringside didn’t work for me. Yes, you could hear the punches more than normal per-
haps. And when it’s a big fight, I tend to get distracted looking for celebrities seated in the
first two rows. But I really think the high energy, visceral sports — football, basketball,
boxing — need the roar of the crowd to sustain the energy of the telecast.

Even auto racing, which has the advantage of generating its own noise, feels slightly naked
without its live audience. I talked with Texas Motor Speedway President Eddie Gossage last

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 1/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. PGA tees off at Colonial, sans fans

week and as he promoted Saturday’s return to Indycar racing, even he said, “It’s live, it’s
prime time, it’s NBC — but I’ 11 be honest it’s not the same without the fans here.”’

Time will tell with the NBA playoffs in Orlando and football season to follow. But I tend to
agree with Gossage there, too. “I know they say they’re going to pipe in crowd noise, but
I’m not sure if I like that. Who controls the volume? A player drops a pass, what sort of
noise do they give us?” Gossage said.

Along those lines, I tried to engage in a little Bundesliga the other day from Germany. As
soon as the game began, the songs that are such a part of soccer filled the air. But given
that it was painfully obvious no one was in the stadium but a few scattered officials, it felt
like a mockery. I much preferred the stuffed animals seated behind home plate in Korean
baseball. For one thing, none of them were looking at their phones. I would say that’s
something MLB should consider, but it would take the owners and players a month to fight
over where to place the bears and the monkeys.

Golf is a separate entity, a sport where quiet always plays a major role. When you think of a
Tiger Woods fist pump behind the 16th green at Augusta as the “patrons” go crazy and
Verne says, “In your LIFE!” — yeah, that sort of moment is on hold for a bit. And I agree
with Rory Mcilroy that there’s absolutely no need to play a Ryder Cup if the course can’t be
packed with fans.

But golf is mostly about watching the greatest players in the world executing shots and
making charges or holding them off. The byplay between golfer and caddie that we surely
will hear more of this weekend offers an authentic behindthescenes look into the sport
even without players wearing microphones (although a few of them will).

And the big thing is the names at Colonial.

Rory. Dustin. Justin. Brooks. Phil. Xander. Rickie. Kuchar. Rahm.

Other than Tiger, the names are here. “Every shot counts,’’ Justin Thomas said, “and
that’s for me the thing that’s going to be the hardest because I sometimes feel rusty after
two, three weeks off, let alone four months.

“That’s going to be weird. But at the same time it’s going to be weird for everybody.”’

I think you can say that about sports, in general, as we turn the pages of the 2020 calendar.
We’re a little rusty at this, we haven’t done it for a while and it’s going to be weird.

But we’re grateful that it’s here.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 1/page/1/textview 2/2
