2020. 6. 18. Floyd mourned

Floyd mourned

The Oklahoman - 5 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Aaron Morrison and Matt Sedensky

MINNEAPOLIS — Hollywood celebrities, musicians and politicians gathered in front of the
golden casket of George Floyd at a fiery memorial Thursday for the man whose death at the
hands of police sparked global protests, with a civil rights leader declaring it is time for

black people to demand, “Get your knee off our necks!”
7 ao = _ * _ ery - - rs Ta : ‘s ‘ a
Be ee nf PVA eee fey Tae zs tr awe a

‘a { ey 2 me

f.)
Cy a ar i a ‘
aK eat BC ustento Pye LE ae

48

     

. Ze BEL. 4
The service — the first in a series of memorials set for three cities over six days — un-
folded at a sanctuary at North Central University as a judge a few blocks away set bail at
$750,000 each for the three fired Minneapolis police officers charged with aiding and
abetting murder in Floyd's death.
Floyd, a 46-year-old outof-work bouncer, died May 25 after a white police officer, Derek
Chauvin, put his knee on Floyd's neck for several minutes as he lay handcuffed on the
pavement, gasping that he couldn't breathe. Chauvin has been charged with murder, and
he and the others could get up to 40 years in prison.
From coast to coast, and from Paris and London to Sydney and Rio de Janeiro, the chilling
cellphone video of Floyd's slow death has set off turbulent and sometimes violent demon-
strations against police brutality, racism and inequality.
“George Floyd's story has been the story of black folks. Because ever since 401 years ago,
the reason we could never be who we wanted and dreamed to be is you kept your knee on
our neck,” the Rev. Al Sharpton said in a fierce eulogy. “It's time for us to stand up in Ge-
orge's name and say, Get your knee off our necks!'”
Sharpton vowed this will become a movement to “change the whole system of justice.”
“Time is out for not holding you accountable! Time is out for you making excuses! Time is
out for you trying to stall! Time is out for empty words and empty promses! Time is out for
you filibustering and trying to stall the arm of justice!” he said.
The service drew the Rev. Jesse Jackson, Sen. Amy Klobuchar and members of Congress,
including Reps. Ilhan Omar, Sheila Jackson-Lee and Ayana Pressley. Among the celebrities
in attendance were T. I., Ludacris, Tyrese Gibson, Kevin Hart, Tiffany Haddish and Marsai
Martin.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/20200605/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. Floyd mourned

“All these people came to see my brother,” Philones Floyd told the crowd at the memorial
in awe as he recounted their childhoods playing catch and eating banana- mayonnaise
sandwiches. “That's amazing to me that he touched so many people's hearts because he
touched our hearts.”

Those gathered stood in silence for 8 minutes, 46 seconds, the amount of time Floyd was
alleged to be on the ground under the control of police.

The casket was flanked by white and purple flowers, and a vibrant image was projected
above the pulpit of a mural of Floyd painted at the street corner where he was seized by po-
lice on suspicion of passing a counterfeit $20 bill at a convenience store. The message on
the mural: “I can breathe now.”

The sanctuary normally seats 1,000, but because of the coronavirus outbreak, the capacity
was reduced to about 500, and many mourners wore masks.

After the Minneapolis event, his body will go to Raeford, North Carolina, where he was
born, for a public viewing and private family service on Saturday.

Next, a public viewing will be held Monday in Houston, where he was raised and lived most
of his life. Then a 500-person service will take place Tuesday at the Fountain of Praise
church.

In the U.S., where protests had been marked by bouts of lawlessness since last week, rela-
tive quiet continued for a second straight night Wednesday following a decision by prose-
cutors to charge the three other officers at the scene and file a new, more serious count of
murder against Chauvin.

Meantime, in Georgia, a white father and son charged in another killing of a black man
that has raised racial tensions in the U.S. made a court appearance Thursday via video. A
state investigator testified that Travis McMichael was heard uttering a racist slur as he
stood over the body of Ahmaud Arbery after killing him with three blasts from a pump-ac-
tion shotgun.

The new charges in Minneapolis punctuated an unprecedented week in recent American
history, in which largely peaceful protests took place in communities of all sizes but were
rocked by bursts of violence, including deadly attacks on officers, theft, vandalism and ar-
son. In Minneapolis alone, more than 220 buildings were damaged or burned, with damage
topping $55 million, city officials said.

Nationwide, more than 10,000 people have been arrested, an Associated Press tally found.
More than a dozen deaths have been reported, though the circumstances in many cases are
still being sorted out.

Demonstrations have been held around the globe, with protesters focusing on abuses in
their own countries.

“It's a solidarity question. We stand with our brothers, internationally, our sisters as well,
but the same thing is happening here. It's no different,” Isaak Kabenge said in Stockholm.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/20200605/page/1/textview 2/2
