2020. 6. 17. Messaging on race:

Messaging on race:

The Washington Post - 12 Jun 2020 - A1 - BY ASHLEY PARKER AND JOSH DAWSEY ashley.parker@washpost.com
josh.dawsey@washpost.com Scott Clement and Annie Linskey contributed to this report.

Trump seems to be fighting the national tide.
me, i he - ent cot ie E = =
i i oe ae nor

   

a
at

 

Pm Pediat reso bn

At a time when much of the country appears to be moving in a different direction, Presi-
dent Trump has charged into a series of fights over the nation’s racist legacy — gambling
that taking divisive stances on Confederate symbols and policing will energize his mostly
white supporters in November.

But many Republicans and even some of Trump’s own advisers worry that the approach
risks further alienating voters who have already started to abandon him, including col-
lege-educated whites, and to harden opposition to him among minorities.

Though Trump has long sought to exploit class resentment and racial tensions for political
gain, his decision to continue to do so in the wake of the death of George Floyd — an un-
armed black man killed in Minneapolis policy custody — has left some in his orbit uneasy,
and Democrats eager to capitalize on what some Say is a racist president revealing his true
beliefs.

Trump in recent weeks has repeatedly signaled that his sympathies lie with the police over
the protesters, whom he has broadly portrayed as members of a loosely affiliated anti-fas-
cist movement known as antifa, though the vast majority of the demonstrators across the
country have been peaceful. Since Floyd’s death, he has tweeted about “LAW & ORDER!”
more than a dozen times.

In a roundtable Thursday in Dallas, Trump proclaimed that the nation’s problems with
racism will be solved “very easily. It will go quickly and it will go very easily.”

“Americans are good and virtuous people,” Trump said. “We have to work together to
confront bigotry and prejudice wherever they appear. But we’ll make no progress and heal
no wounds by falsely labeling tens of millions of decent Americans as racists or bigots.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200612/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. Messaging on race:

Trump this week interjected himself into an emerging debate over renaming military bases
named after Confederate generals, opposing the idea and casting the issue as one of “her-
itage.” He also announced that his first rally since the coronavirus pandemic shuttered
most the country will be in Tulsa on Juneteenth — the June 19 holiday commemorating the
end of slavery in the United States. The Oklahoma city is the site of the 1921 Tulsa mas-
sacre, one of the worst episodes of racial violence in the country’s history.

“This isn’t just a wink to white supremacists — he’s throwing them a welcome home
party,” tweeted Sen. Kamala D. Harris (D- Calif.), a potential running mate to presumptive
Democratic presidential nominee Joe Biden.

The Trump campaign on Thursday also released a new 30second ad portraying the presi-
dent as a tough-on-crime patriot, while depicting Biden as a radical leftist who won’t
stand up to Black Lives Matter protesters and demands from some on the left to “Defund
the Police.”

“Antifa is destroying our communities — rioting, looting,” says the ad’s narrator, as fiery
images of violence flit across the screen. “Yet Joe Biden kneels down and his staff sends
money for bail.”

Walter Johnson, a professor of African and African American studies at Harvard University,
argued that Trump seeks to create a shared enemy for the coalition of plutocrats and white
populists that form his base of support.

“That’s what we’re seeing in this kind of doubling down on the traditions of white nation-
alism,” said Johnson, who is also the co-founder of the Commonwealth Project, a St.
Louis-based effort that brings together academics, activists and artists to support social
change in the city. “That has proven thus far to be a fairly effective strategy for him, and so
I’m not surprised he’s doubling down.”

In the aftermath of Floyd’s death, the president’s positions on issues ranging from racism
in policing to Confederate symbols has appeared out of step with public opinion and moves
by many corporations and institutions to implement changes.

On Wednesday, as White House press secretary Kayleigh Mcenany was defending Trump’s
position not to rename military bases honoring Confederate generals, NASCAR announced
that it was banning the Confederate flag from all of its events and properties, saying it ran
“contrary to our commitment to providing a welcoming and inclusive environment.”

The changes, both political and cultural, kept coming on Thursday. Lady Antebellum, the
country music group, announced it was changing its name to Lady A, because of the term’s
association with the slavery era. Minnesota Gov. Tim Walz (D) endorsed a package of
sweeping police restructuring measures for a state battered by protests over Floyd’s death.
And House Minority Leader Kevin Mccarthy (R- Calif.), an ally of the president, said he
supports a Democratic proposal to ban police chokeholds and signaled an openness to re-
naming some military bases named after Confederate leaders.

Recent polling shows that Trump’s harsh approach to the protests is not in sync with
much of the country. A Washington Post-schar School poll released Tuesday found that 74
percent of adults supported the protesters, including 53 percent of Republicans. A Mon-
mouth University poll conducted from May 28 to June 1 found that while 17 percent said

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200612/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. Messaging on race:

the actions of protesters such as burning a police precinct in Minneapolis were “fully justi-
fied,” a 57 percent majority said the anger that led to these protests was fully justified.

“It seems to me that Trump represents the death rattle of an older America,” said Eddie
Glaude, chair of the department of African American studies at Princeton University. “Ev-
erything he’s doubling down on is precisely what we’re trying to leave behind, and so the
battle that is now being engaged is precisely a battle surrounding what kind of country will
we be moving forward, and he is holding onto with all of his might this idea of America as a
white nation.”

Inside Trump’s orbit, several of the president’s aides are frustrated that some of his
crafted statements on the recent unrest have been eclipsed by his incendiary tweets or re-
marks. Some also regret the decision on June 1 to use force to clear Lafayette Square of
protesters before he staged a photo op in front of St. John’s Episcopal Church.

Trump’s pollsters and political advisers have also been encouraging him to soften his
message in an effort to win back suburban women and other moderate voters in swing
states where he is trailing in the polls.

Karine Jean-pierre, a senior adviser to the Biden campaign, said the 2018 elections, in
which Democrats retook the House, was an early preview of the political price Trump could
pay in November.

“It was a rebuke on Donald Trump, it was a rebuke on his behavior and it was a rebuke on
his bigotry and misogyny,” JeanPierre said. “Suburban women were like, ‘Okay, we can’t
deal with this anymore.’ Independents were like, ‘We can’t deal with this anymore.’ ”

One administration official, who like others spoke on the condition of anonymity to dis-
cuss internal dynamics, expressed frustration that Trump was gratuitously weighing in on
Confederate memorials and a protester getting shoved to the ground in Buffalo, as well as
unnecessarily attacking rivals like Sen. Mitt Romney (R-utah), who marched in a Black
Lives Matter protest over the weekend. The official added that Trump is mainly surround-
ing himself with a small knot of aides and even then is often not following their advice.
Two White House officials said the public largely agrees with the president that calls to de-
fund the police go too far, and allies have said they wish Trump would focus on painting
the Democrats as supporting lawlessness.

During a meeting with Republicans at the White House last week, Trump said what hap-
pened to Floyd was “horrible,” said one of the attendees, speaking anonymously to share
details of a private conversation. But the president then veered into heralding “law and or-
der” and getting tough on looters and protesters, the person added.

Trump has told allies that his stance against protesters will poll better than they think, a
person who has spoken to him about it said.

“Tf he was trying to lose, he’d be doing basically what he is doing right now,” said a
Republican strategist in frequent touch with the White House.

In some instances, both the president and his team have been surprised at the backlash he
has prompted. After Trump suggested in a tweet that a 75-year-old Buffalo protester who
was hospitalized after being shoved to the ground by police might have been an “ANTIFA
provocateur,” a senior White House official said the president was taken aback by the neg-
ative reaction, which “threw the West Wing into a tailspin for many hours.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200612/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. Messaging on race:

Some Republicans and Trump allies were also upset after realizing the president’s team
had scheduled his first campaign rally since coronavirus outbreak for Juneteenth in Tulsa,
although several people familiar with the planning said the date was unintentional. Some
allies warned against moving ahead with the rally, but other Trump aides said they were
not overly bothered about the historical significance and that Trump himself is “not at all
concerned” about safety implications, whether from the coronavirus or protesters.

White House spokesman Judd Deere defended Trump’s handling of the recent racial un-
rest, saying that “any coordinated attempt by the Left and the media to suggest otherwise
is shameful and only meant to sow division and ignore the President’s work for under-
served communities.”

“President Trump’s record as a private citizen and as president has been one of fighting
for inclusion and advocating for the equal treatment of all,” Deere said in a statement.

“Tt seems to me that Trump represents the death rattle of an older America. Everything
he’s doubling down on is precisely what we’re trying to leave behind.” chair of the African
American studies department at Princeton

Eddie Glaude,

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200612/page/1/textview 4/4
