2020. 6. 17. Home prices still manage bump

Home prices still manage bump
2.8% rise for Dallas area in March is below national gain of 4.4%

The Dallas Morning News - 27 May 2020 - 1A - By STEVE BROWN Real Estate Editor stevebrown@dallasnews.com Twit-
ter: @Stevebrowndmn

Home prices in the Dallas area and nationwide saw moderate increases in March, the first
month that brought significant impact from the virus.

Home prices in the Dallas area and nationwide saw moderate increases in March, the first
month that brought significant impact from the pandemic.

Dallasarea home prices rose 2.8% from a year ago and nationwide prices were 4.4% higher
in the closely watched S&P Corelogic Caseshiller home price index.

The yearoveryear Dallas home price gain was one of the smallest in eight years.

“March’s data witnessed the first impact of the COVID19 pandemic,” S&P’S Craig J. Laz-
zara Said in the report. “That said, housing prices continue to be remarkably stable.
“Housing prices have not yet registered any adverse effects from the governmental sup-
pression of economic activity in response to the COVID19 pandemic,” he said. “As much of
the U.S. economy remained shuttered in April, next month’s data may show a more notice-
able impact.”

The Dallas area had one of the smallest annual home price gains of the 19 major U.S. mar-
kets included in the monthly Caseshiller survey.

Phoenix had the biggest increase with an 8.2% rise in home prices from March 2019. Home
prices were up 6.9% in Seattle and 5.8% in Charlotte,

North Texas numbers

N.C.

The rate of home price growth in Dallas and most major U.S. cities has slowed in the last
year but has remained positive.

But home prices remain at record levels. Dallas prices have risen more than 70% since the
worst of the Great Recession.

With the pandemic, home sales around the country and in North Texas have slowed. And
fewer homes are on the market.

“While the pandemic has introduced a lot of uncertainty about the economic outlook, the
strong demand leading up the pandemic suggests there are many buyers who are still
looking to buy a home but are waiting for the economy to open up,” Selma Hepp,
Corelogic’s deputy chief economist, said in an email. “Certainly, recent data suggests
home buying activity picking up, which amid low forsale inventory levels will continue to
prop up home prices.”

With millions of Americans losing their jobs because of the virus, housing analysts warn
that it might take several months to gauge the impact on the home market.

“Relative to the broader economy, the housing market — particularly home prices — have
gotten away more or less scotfree so far,” Zillow economist Matthew Speakman said.
“Still, so much remains uncertain — including the longerterm path for home prices — but
for now, competition for homes is holding strong and keeping prices afloat.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200527/page/1/textview 4/1
