2020. 6. 17. TRUMP tweets about beaten man.

TRUMP tweets about beaten man.
He calls for arrests after attack on victim caught on camera

The Dallas Morning News - 1 Jun 2020 - 1A - By CASSANDRA JARAMILLO, TODD J. GILLMAN and EVAMARIE AYALA
Staff Writers Staff writers Erik Schutz, Corbett Smith, Dana Branham and Tom Steele contributed to this report.
cjaramillo@dallasnews.com, tgillman@dallasnews.com, eayala@dallasnews.com Twitter

President Donald Trump on Sunday demanded arrests and severe punishments for Dallas
protesters who beat a machetewielding man the night before, an incident captured on
videos that drew viral attention online.

“SO TERRIBLE! Where are the arrests and LONG TERM jail sentences?” the president
wrote on Twitter, retweeting and amplifying an unfounded claim by a California musician
who blamed the attack on “Antifa.”

The man whose claim Trump retweeted issued a string of tweets on Sunday blaming vio-
lence around the country on antifa. The term stands for antifascists and broadly refers to
far left extremists or anarchists who view government and wealthy elites as oppressors.
There was no evidence of involvement by any organized group in the attack.

Dallas police said Sunday that they had made no arrests in the incident and were reviewing
video footage.

The attack came toward the end of the second straight day of unrest in Dallas. Protests be-
gan peacefully before deteriorating into violence, looting and vandalism. People nation-
wide are protesting the death George Floyd and many other incidents of police brutality
against African Americans. Floyd died Monday when a Minneapolis police officer knelt on
his neck for nearly nine minutes. The officer, Derek Chauvin, was fired and then arrested
Friday on charges of murder and manslaughter.

Dallas enacted a 7 p.m. curfew Sunday for parts of the city. It includes the area where the
attack occurred in the Victory Park area, just north of downtown.

Graphic viral videos of the attack posted on social media Saturday night show demonstra-
tors near the House of Blues stomping and kicking the man, who was hospitalized and in
stable condition.

One attacker appeared to slam a skateboard into the man at least once and possibly several
times, while at least one other appeared to pummel him with a fistsize stone.

The attack left the man bloody, contorted and motionless on the ground. An image posted
later showed him sitting up and being treated by medics.

A police spokesman said the man went to the site “carrying a machete to allegedly protect
his neighborhood from protesters. The victim confronted protesters while holding the ma-
chete and was subsequently assaulted.”

Two lesswidely circulated videos on social media show not only the attack but also 10 to 15
seconds leading up to it.

Those videos show several people hurling objects at the man, who appears to be holding a
long bladed object. The man eventually runs in the direction of someone carrying a skate-
board. Then more than a dozen people descend on him and attack from all sides.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200601/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. TRUMP tweets about beaten man.

Even in the longer videos, the confrontation had already begun, leaving it unclear what
happened leading up to the incident.
“SO TERRIBLE! Where are the arrests and LONG TERM jail sentences?” President Donald

Trump

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200601/page/1/textview

2/2
