2020. 6. 17. Trump seeks to punish Big Tech

Trump seeks to punish Big Tech

ORDER TAKES AIM AT LEGAL PROTECTIONS

The Washington Post : 29 May 2020 - A1 - BY TONY ROMM AND ELIZABETH DWOSKIN

Critics call directive a threat to free speech

 

President Trump on Thursday signed an executive order that could open the door for the
U.S. government to assume oversight of political speech on the Internet, a broadside
against Silicon Valley that a wide array of critics derided as a threat to free speech.

The new directive seeks to change a federal law that has spared tech companies from being
sued or held liable for most posts, photos and videos shared by users on their sites. Tech
giants herald these protections, known as Section 230, as the bedrock of the Internet. But
Trump repeatedly has argued they allow Facebook, Google and Twitter to censor conserva-
tives with impunity — charges these companies deny.

“‘We’re here today to defend free speech from one of the greatest dangers,” Trump said
before signing the document.

The order signed Thursday encourages the Federal Communications Commission to re-
think the scope of Section 230 and when its liability protections apply. The order also seeks
to channel complaints about political bias to the

Federal Trade Commission, an agency that the White House has asked to probe whether
tech companies’ content-moderation policies are in keeping with their pledges of neutral-
ity.

The order additionally created a council in cooperation with state attorneys general to
probe allegations of censorship based on political views. And it tasked federal agencies
with reviewing their spending on social media advertising.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200529/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. Trump seeks to punish Big Tech

While Trump has threatened to penalize tech companies for years, his signing of the order
Thursday came in response to a decision by Twitter earlier in the week to mark two of his
erroneous tweets with fact-checking labels. The small move set off a firestorm of tweets
by the president threatening social media companies with regulations and other punish-
ments.

Trump’s directive now could set the stage for federal regulators to write new rules and is-
sue new punishments for companies deemed to exhibit political bias. Depending on how
the order is carried out, it poses the potential for wide-ranging consequences for a much
broader segment of the Internet beyond just the social media giants, potentially affecting
every website, app or service where users congregate online with new liability for the con-
tent on their platform.

Already, tech companies are discussing whether to fight back with a lawsuit challenging
the executive order, according to two people familiar with the deliberations who spoke on
the condition of anonymity because no decision has been made.

Legal experts said the directive will almost certainly be challenged in court, arguing it
threatens to undermine the First Amendment. A wide array of critics in Congress, the tech
industry and across the political spectrum also accused the White House of deputizing
government agencies to carry out Trump’s personal vendettas.

“This is simply setting the wheels of law enforcement and regulation in motion against a
private company for questioning the president,” said Matt Schruers, president of the
Computer and Communications Industry Association, a Washington trade group that rep-
resents Facebook, Google and other major tech companies.

Facebook spokeswoman Liz Bourgeois said in a statement that the company believes in
protecting freedom of expression along with protecting users from harmful content.
“Those rules apply to everybody,” she said. “Repealing or limiting Section 230 will have
the opposite effect. It will restrict more speech online, not less.”

Google spokeswoman Riva Sciuto said in a statement that undermining Section 230 could
hurt the economy and the United States’ role in Internet freedom.

“We have clear content policies and we enforce them without regard to political view-
point,” she said. “Our platforms have empowered a wide range of people and organiza-
tions from across the political spectrum, giving them a voice and new ways to reach their
audiences.”

Twitter did not respond to requests for comment.

Executives and lobbyists at social media companies were taken by surprise by Trump’s or-
der, according to two people who spoke on the condition of anonymity because the compa-
nies were formulating their responses. Internally, some Silicon Valley leaders viewed the
policy as a political move that might not withstand legal scrutiny. Still, they expressed an
early openness to challenging the order in court, the people said.

For now, though, Trump’s order may prove difficult or impossible to enforce, experts said
even before the president had signed it. But it could have far-reaching consequences, am-
plifying the Trump administration’s power over social media companies as the country
gears up for the 2020 election, some critics cautioned. “Donald Trump’s order is plainly il-
legal,” charged Sen. Ron Wyden (D- Ore.), one of the authors of the law that includes Sec-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200529/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. Trump seeks to punish Big Tech

tion 230. He added the president sought only to “bully companies like Facebook, Youtube
and Twitter into giving him favorable treatment.”

The order marks the White House’s most significant attempt to rein in the tech giants after
years of threats to do so from Trump and his top deputies. It also reflects the delicate,
four-year dance between a president who is one of the most popular social media users in
the world and the very sites and services where he broadcasts his views.

For years, Trump has accused tech giants of engaging in political censorship, at times
pointing to their roots in the liberal-leaning San Francisco Bay area. He’s accused Twitter
CEO Jack Dorsey of limiting his followers, grumbled about Google search results and sug-
gested at times the tech industry has sought to undermine his reelection.

Speaking in the Oval Office, Trump on Thursday again blasted the tech industry broadly for
having amassed “unchecked power.” Attorney General William P. Barr added the Justice
Department is helping to assemble legislation that might further regulate the industry,
perhaps holding it liable for content that companies choose to leave online or take down.
It’s not only the White House seeking to rein in tech. States attorneys general and
Congress over the past year have launched probes into tech giants’ market power, and they
are expected to file antitrust lawsuits targeting Google as soon as this summer. Arizona’s
attorney general just this week sued the search giant for privacy violations, adding toa
growing chorus of regulators around the country who criticize the company and its peers
for the way they protect users’ personal information.

But any regulation that implicates speech — especially political content online — threat-
ens to raise a raft of thorny constitutional issues. Those concerns long have stymied other
U.S. lawmakers who similarly have hoped to hold social media companies accountable for
the way they police content online. The 26 words that make up the heart of Section 230
date back to 1996, before the Internet had taken off in popularity. It spared major digital
services from lawsuits targeting them for what takes place on their platforms, while at the
same time permitting them to do content regulation.

But the legal shield has taken on wider implications as the tech sector has grown over the
past two decades, offering a shield to a wider array of companies, including Amazon,
whose third-party sellers hawk counterfeits, and the ridehailing service Uber, which con-
tends it isn’t responsible for sexual assaults that take place in the company’s rides. (Ama-
zon founder and CEO Jeff Bezos owns The Washington Post.)

Democrats have tried to force the companies to better police hate speech, election false-
hoods and other abusive content, threatening to strip social media sites of their liability
protections if they don’t more aggressively police the Web. Republicans, meanwhile, have
long charged the companies are liberally biased and have suppressed right-leaning voices,
although the companies have denied those claims. In doing so, they threatened for years
before Trump’s executive order to revoke Section 230 as punishment for these perceived
biases.

Any action from the order would hinge on the FTC and FCC, two independent agencies that
are supposed to operate separately of Trump’s Cabinet and his political influence. The FTC
is “committed to robust enforcement of consumer protection and competition laws,” con-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200529/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. Trump seeks to punish Big Tech

sistent with its authority, spokesman Peter Kaplan said. The FCC will review the govern-
ment’s request that the agency issue new rules, Chairman Ajit Pai (R) said Thursday.

The executive order touched off widespread opposition, uniting Democratic lawmakers,
digital experts, longtime conservativeleaning advocacy groups and a bevy of free speech
activists, most of whom cited free speech protections. Many agreed it could amount to
government interference in private speech, a violation of the First Amendment.

“Social media can be frustrating,” Jessica Rosenworcel, a Democratic federal communica-
tions commissioner, said in a statement. “But an executive order that would turn the Fed-
eral Communications Commission into the president’s speech police is not the answer.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200529/page/1/textview 4/4
