2020. 6. 17. The CDC

The CDC
CDC fionds it began arriving in midjanuary

The Dallas Morning News - 30 May 2020 - 1A - By MIKE STOBBE and CARLA K. JOHNSON

is chasing the coronavirus’ roots in the U.S. and has determined it arrived here in midjan-

  

i

NEW YORK — The spark that started the U.S. coronavirus epidemic arrived during a three-
week window from midjanuary to early February, before the nation halted travel from
China, according to the most comprehensive federal study to date of when the virus began
spreading.

That means anyone in the U.S. who thought they had the virus in December or early Jan-
uary probably had the flu, public health researchers said.

Some people have claimed that Americans were getting sick from the coronavirus as early
as November and that infections were spreading in the U.S. before any case was identified,
said Dr. Robert Redfield, the head of the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

“T This] puts data into the discussion. Prior to this we had discussion without a lot of data,”
he said.

In the study released Friday, CDC researchers collaborated with health officials in six
states, as well as genetics researchers and disease modelers in the Seattle area.

They drew on four kinds of data. One was illnesses reported by hospital emergency depart-
ments across the country. Another was a look back at about 11,000 respiratory specimens
collected in January and February. A third was a genetic analysis of viruses taken from pa-
tients in California, Washington state and the Northeast. Finally, autopsy findings from
California also fit the theory.

The new coronavirus emerged in Wuhan, China, late last year. The first

U.S. infection to be identified was of a traveler — a Washington state man who returned
from Wuhan on Jan. 15 and sought help at a clinic on Jan. 19.

The White House announced a ban on travelers from China on Jan. 31, with implementa-
tion beginning Feb. 3. Before that, some travelers were screened for symptoms at some

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200530/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. The CDC

airports. Only later did health officials realize that the virus could spread before symptoms
show up, rendering symptombased screening imperfect.

White House officials in February declared that the virus was contained and not a current
risk to the American public. Until late February, coronavirus infections were too rarely di-
agnosed by emergency departments to be identified as a growing epidemic, the study
found.

But limited spread in some communities was occurring in late January and early February,
the study found.

Early instances of infection were found in the 11,000 airway samples collected from six
states. The earliest was in a sample collected Feb. 21 in the Seattle area.

Genetic analysis from early cases suggest a single lineage of virus from China began
spreading in the United States between Jan. 18 and Feb. 9.

One of the report’s authors, Trevor Bedford of Seattle’s Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research
Center, has been tracking the pandemic using the virus’s genetic code. He said in an email
Friday that there could have been a few undetected cases of the coronavirus in the U.S. in
December or January but that flu season was at its height.

“Based on just symptoms in January, it’s almost certainly flu or another respiratory infec-
tion,” Bedford said.

The earliest infections in Washington and California were from viruses originating in
China, a genetic analysis found. Several introductions of the virus from Europe followed in
February and March.

The Trump administration announced a travel ban for most of Europe on March 11, and it
went into effect March 13. The United Kingdom and Ireland were initially not included.
Ana Gonzalezreiche and her fellow authors wrote that the travel restrictions did little to
prevent spread because communitydriven transmission was already occurring.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200530/page/1/textview 2/2
