2020. 6. 18. Inhofe, Horn split on base names

Inhofe, Horn split on base names

The Oklahoman « 13 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Chris Casteel Staff writer ccasteel@oklahoman.com

Oklahoma Sen. Jim Inhofe, who leads the Senate committee that oversees Defense Depart-
ment policy, said this week that he wants states and local communities to have input into
whether military bases named after Confederate generals should be renamed.

id

“My effort's going to be to allow the local communities, the cities, the towns, the states, to
participate in whether they want to do this,” Inhofe, a Republican and the chairman of the
Senate Armed Services Committee, told reporters.

Rep. Kendra Horn, D-Oklahoma City, said Congress should take a hard look at whether
military bases should be named after people who fought against the U.S. government to
protect slavery.

Inhofe's committee completed work this week on its annual defense bill, legislation that
covers everything from personnel and weapons systems to health care and housing.

The panel adopted an amendment by Sen. Elizabeth Warren, D-Mass., that would establish
a commission “to study and provide recommendations concerning the removal, names,
symbols, displays, monuments, and paraphernalia that honor or commemorate the Con-
federate States of America, addressing an implementation plan, cost, and criteria for re-
naming, among other procedures.”

Under the bill, the plan would be implemented three years after enactment of the legisla-
tion.

The bill must now go before the full Senate. Inhofe may seek to amend the bill so renaming
the bases would be optional, rather than mandatory after the commission's work con-
cludes.

Sen. Jack Reed, of Rhode Island, the top Democrat on the committee, said the panel made
progress on the matter. The committee was a mostly bipartisan effort that “put us in a po-
sition of carefully and thoughtfully looking at this issue.”

He said, “One of the requirements of the commission is to touch base with localities before
they make their recommendations to the Secretary of Defense.”

The names of the 10 U.S. military bases named after Confederate generals have come under
scrutiny as the killing of George Floyd by a Minneapolis police officer last month has re-
newed calls to end the honoring of the Confederacy through memorials, statues and other
means.

President Donald Trump said he would oppose any effort to rename the bases.

In a statement released by the White House on Wednesday, t he president said, “It has
been suggested that we should rename as many as 10 of our legendary military bases, such
as Fort Bragg in North Carolina; Fort Hood in Texas; Fort Benning in Georgia. And the list
goes on.

“These monumental and very powerful bases have become part of a great American her-
itage and a history of winning, victory, and freedom. The United States of America trained

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/2020061 3/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. Inhofe, Horn split on base names

and deployed our heroes [here]... and won two world wars. Therefore, my administration
will not even consider the renaming of these magnificent and fabled military installa-
tions.”

The House Armed Services Committee, controlled by Democrats, is expected to draft its
defense bill next month. That legislation will ultimately have to be reconciled with the Se-
nate bill.

Horn, a member of the committee, said members need to examine whether bases should
bear the names of Confederate generals.

She said .“Many of our nation's military bases take their names from a generation of Con-
federate generals who fought for slavery and against the United States of America,” Horn
said.

‘‘We need to assess whether these names reflect the selfless courage, equality, and honor
that our nation's military institutions embody. I think they do not. We need an honest ac-
counting of our history, including a recognition of our nation's diverse leaders that reflect
these values. I introduced a bipartisan bill, cosponsored by the full Oklahoma delegation,
to name the downtown Oklahoma City post office in honor of Clara Luper, whose work as a
civil rights leader changed Oklahoma and the nation. This is just one example of how we
can celebrate our history and the heroes who truly reflect our nation's values.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/2020061 3/page/1/textview 2/2
