2020. 6. 17. Protesters risk infection to ‘do whatever it takes’

Protesters risk infection to ‘do whatever it takes’

Pent-up anger, fatalism drive many to a choice: Marches over quarantine

The Washington Post : 8 Jun 2020: A1 : BY MARC FISHER, PETER JAMISON AND AVA WALLACE

In the middle of the night, as some of the first protests raged in Louisville, Shae Smith and
her husband, Walt, decided to break out of their pandemic quarantine and take to the
streets.

 

a.
= a See a

  

peers

erage Sea . 5 2
“We were actually in bed and I finally woke Walt up and said, ‘Babe, I think you need to go
down there,’ ” Shae recalled. “‘You need to see what’s going on, we need to be a part of
this.’ ”

At 2:15 a.m., Walt went downtown to see, to make a statement. The Smiths had talked and
talked about the virus; they knew joining the protests against police brutality meant a
higher risk of being infected. They took the risk to give their 10-year-old son a chance at a
future in which he is not “walking around with the spirit of fear,” Shae said. They took the
risk because after dealing with the pandemic “we still have to do whatever it takes.”

The protests mean exposure to the virus and potentially accelerating its spread. The virus
has killed more than 109,000 Americans, including a disproportionate number of blacks.
Yet the Smiths and tens of thousands of others have chosen to take the risk.

Far from being separate crises, the deadly epidemic of covid-19,

the disease caused by the novel coronavirus, and the sudden explosion of street protests
against police violence are intimately connected, according to protesters and public and
mental health professionals.

   

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200608/page/1/textview 115
2020. 6. 17. Protesters risk infection to ‘do whatever it takes’

“People are so pent-up with frustration from being inside for so long,” said Patricia New-
ton, chief executive and medical director of the Black Psychiatrists of America, which has
about 2,000 members. “That was the kindling, and the police brutality lit the fire. People
tell me, ‘I need to get out of the house,’ and ‘ I’m having cabin fever.’ When people feel
hopeless, they feel they have nothing to lose and caution goes to the wind.”

For Shae and Walt Smith, the decision to leave home and walk among strangers for the
first time in months was calculated, the result of a thorough discussion about what lay
ahead for their two young sons as black men in America.

In Columbia, Md., Jada Smith made the pivot more impulsively. On the day a Minneapolis
police officer drove his knee into George Floyd’s neck until he died, Smith had barely left
her house in three months.

Smith, 23, broke her self-isolation, joining teeming, screaming, shoulder-to-shoulder
protesters who packed streets north of the White House.

“F--- coronavirus. Who cares about coronavirus?” she said. “You can’t even walk out the
door without being afraid for your skin color. This is more serious than what the coron-
avirus was. This is our lives out here. This is our children’s lives.”

For medical professionals, the nightly images of huge crowds walking city streets, shout-
ing and chanting, sometimes wearing masks but with hardly any possibility of social dis-
tancing, is frightening, even if it’s also understandable.

Newton and others who have counseled protesters describe the connection between the
two crises as complex — very different for different people. Some protesters consciously
weigh the risks of catching the virus against a moral calling to voice their anger about
racial bias. Others simply follow their passion to meet the moment on the nation’s streets.
What both groups have in common is a web of emotions stemming from the pandemic:
anger, isolation, loneliness, frustration, powerlessness, hopelessness.

“There are a lot of factors weighing on people,” said Reed V. Tuckson, chairman of the
Black Coalition Against Covid-19 and a former D.C. health commissioner. “It would be the
height of hypocrisy for people protesting on behalf of those who cannot breathe to then
bring home a virus that will prevent the people you live with from breathing. At the same
time, a major appeal of protests like these is that they are exciting, engaging and morally
compelling, and even more appealing when people have been quarantined for so long.”
Newton has counseled protesters to consider the health impact of large gatherings. “I keep
telling people, ‘You can’t protest if you’re dead and you can’t protest if you’re on a ventila-
tor,’ ” she said. “If the people in your home and your community get the virus because of
your unwillingness to take precautions, who are you helping? But when people get angry,
they stop thinking.”

The clash between the need to take precautions against the virus and the desire to take part
in the protests came home to Kitaw Demassie when his 13-year-old daughter asked if they
could join a demonstration.

Demassie, a physician who is dean of the School of Public Health at the State University of
New York Downstate, said his daughter understood the risk of infection, “but the anger
and the isolation from the stay-at-home order combined to make her and other young
people feel the need to go out. The isolation of the past three months increases anxiety,

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200608/page/1/textview 2/5
2020. 6. 17. Protesters risk infection to ‘do whatever it takes’

depression and also symptoms of indignation. Demonstrating peacefully helps people do
something with their anger.”

Father and daughter decided to join a group of physicians protesting in their white coats in
Manhattan — “using protection and social distancing,” Demassie was quick to add.

For many years, protests against racial bias have erupted anew after each incident of police
brutality that gains national attention. But this time, Demassie said, the explosion of out-
rage is louder in part because “the interaction with the virus shutdown is fueling these
protests.”

Demassie understands why people feel compelled to protest — after all, he’s joining a
crowd himself — but he remains “very sure that this will have a big impact on the number
of virus cases. There really is no social distancing in these demonstrations.”

It’s a tricky moment, he said: “We have two epidemics — racial disparities in health care,
as we see in the death rate from covid19, and racial injustice as exemplified in the death of
George Floyd. In both cases, we need to flatten the curve.”

It’s not that protesters don’t know that gathering in large crowds is likely to further spread
the virus. Rather, they often view that reality through a blend of fatalism and idealism.
Shae Smith, a 34-year-old manager at a Gap store, sometimes sounds fatalistic. The virus,
police brutality and the way she and other black Americans lived before this year’s events
all added up to a deadened life, she said: “We’re already in survival mode. The unemploy-
ment that people are facing. ... How much more can we take? We’re already at our wit’s
end. It’s like, we’re walking around, in a sense, feeling defeated.”

Yet she also sounds idealistic.

The protests are a chance “to see to it that people are going to be held accountable,” she
said. “We got our mask on, and I made a sign and we went out.”

The fatalism is sometimes literal.

Kelly Rudin, of Bethesda, Md., had lived in terror of the virus. Kelly, 63, would send her 62-
yearold husband Tom out to do the grocery shopping. But the couple, longtime activists
who protested President Trump’s inauguration and the police choking death of Eric Garner
in New York, knew immediately what they would do after Floyd’s death.

“This,” Kelly said, “is worth dying for.”

“If white people don’t come out, our society — ” she hesitated, then finished: “Our society
is basically done anyway.”

Until recently, the Rudins had taken all precautions they could. Now, they donned cloth
masks and promised each other they would stay six feet from everyone else.

But marching amid the crowds, Kelly didn’t feel worried anymore. Watching a group try to
breach a police barricade on Pennsylvania Avenue, Tom lamented that because of the
virus, they could not go closer.

“Ordinarily,” Kelly said, “I’d be in the middle of that.”

They leaned against a fire hydrant for a few minutes. The shouting rose. People ran back
and forth. The Rudins looked at each other. In tandem, they waded into the crowd.

Such stories are both inspiring and worrisome, Newton said.

“T never thought I’d see Americans so fatalistic and idealistic at the same time,” she said.
“The fatalism is very scary. I’ve heard repeatedly people saying to me, ‘If I’m going to get

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200608/page/1/textview 3/5
2020. 6. 17. Protesters risk infection to ‘do whatever it takes’

killed, I want it to be for a reason.’ At the same time, there’s this idealism — they feel it’s
their civic duty to go out on the streets.”

Chante Burg, who recently left her job as a special-education teacher in Louisville to be-
come a disabilities consultant, had plenty of cause to fear the virus. Recently recovered
from Lyme disease, she takes 26 pills a day to boost her immune system. She had spent the
past two months at home with her boyfriend, a former teacher.

But then, after Breonna Taylor, a 26-year-old black emergency medical technician, was
shot and killed by Louisville police in her own home, Burg heard a call to action through
her network of teachers.

“T was livid,” she said. “Just livid. I was furious, I was devastated. I felt like, this is the end.
This is the end. It can’t go on.”

Burg, 34, felt compelled to act. “The virus didn’t concern me at all,” she said. “My immune
system, I’ve built it up, and I have faith, I have faith in God, I have faith in my immune
system.”

She did worry that some people carrying the virus might be among the protesters, that
some people may have gotten cabin fever and were “using these protests to get out of the
house,” she said. “But I don’t dwell on that.”

She feels in the dark about the virus. She mistrusts the White House, the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, basically all of the often-conflicting guidance she hears
on the news.

“We don’t know what to believe or who to trust, so we need to take care of ourselves,”
Burg said.

In contrast, she’s confident that protesting is the right choice: “It’s important to me to be
able to speak out and not live in fear, and it’s important for me to exercise my right to life,
liberty and the pursuit of happiness. I’m not doing that when I’m sitting at home. Today, I
feel empowered, I feel strong. I feel that we’re making progress, and we are going to win.”
In the sea of young faces massed in front of the White House during the past week, Louis
and Merianne de Merode stood out. He is 71 and she is 64. The Georgetown couple both
have compromised immune systems from battles with cancer; they had strictly quaran-
tined themselves, living on delivered groceries, venturing out only for bike rides on lonely
stretches of the C&O Canal towpath.

Fearful of joining the protests because of the risk of infection, they changed their minds
when they read their neighbors’ comments on a email discussion group where affluent Ge-
orgetowners complained about the looting visited upon local shops without discussing the
rioters’ motivations.

The de Merodes put on cloth masks and headed downtown.

“This is 1,000 times more people than we’ve been around,” Merianne said. “We’re walking
with people who don’t all wear masks. So we’re scared.”

But just as they felt morally obliged to protest, they also felt compelled to put themselves
in a 14-day quarantine after the demonstration.

Tuckson, the former D.C. health commissioner, said the same moral responsibility that
brings protesters onto the streets should lead them to quarantine themselves afterward.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200608/page/1/textview 4/5
2020. 6. 17. Protesters risk infection to ‘do whatever it takes’

“If you’re going to follow your idealism,” he said, “you’re going to have to also protect the
people you live with.”

Some health advocates feel a tension between advising protesters to take precautions
against the coronavirus, which has produced disproportionately high death rates among
blacks, and endorsing action against another epidemic — racial disparities in everything
from housing quality to police brutality.

But Newton said the two epidemics are more closely connected than many protesters real-
ize.

“The virus exposed the underbelly of the problems we’ve had in health care for decades —
a disparity in care that reveals some of the same bias we see in police brutality,” she said.
For more than two months this spring, Denelle Acosta locked herself indoors, leaving her
San Antonio home only to buy groceries or ride her bike. As a cancer survivor who is also
diabetic, Acosta said she had to remain hypervigilant as the coronavirus swept across
Texas.

But when she watched the video of the last nine minutes of Floyd’s life, “I just started sob-
bing,” said Acosta, 36, who works as a sommelier and bartender at an upscale restaurant.
“T have all these health issues, but I don’t care. I don’t want a virus to take me, but if I’m
going to be fighting for what’s right, I’ ll go out like that.”

Acosta saw the officer crushing Floyd as a metaphor for how the system weighs on vulner-
able people. She decided to protest in San Antonio, then drove an hour north to Austin to
join another crowd.

In front of Austin police headquarters, Acosta, who wore a black mask, pointed to a camp
of tents and couches where homeless people find shelter beneath a busy highway and be-
gan listing reasons she believes “the system is broken. So many people have no health
care, our education system is a joke, we’re not taking care of our veterans or the elderly.”
Police brutality is front of mind, but she thought also about Trump’s aggressive tweets, the
plight of vulnerable communities and the pandemic, which she said has exposed inequity
in American society.

“Laying my life on this line for this movement is more important to me than dying because
of a virus,” she said. “I can’t take it anymore.”

“Laying my life on this line for this movement is more important to me than dying because
of a virus. I can’t take it anymore.” Denelle Acosta, a diabetic cancer survivor who broke
her two-month isolation to participate in protests in San Antonio and Austin.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200608/page/1/textview 5/5
