2020. 6. 17. Esper, Mattis at odds with Trump Barr seeks to subdue D.C. protests with show of force

Esper, Mattis at odds with Trump Barr seeks to subdue D.C.
protests with show of force

The Washington Post : 4 Jun 2020 - A1 - BY DEVLIN BARRETT

From an FBI command center in Washington’s Chinatown neighborhood, Attorney Gen-
eral William P. Barr has orchestrated a stunning show of force on the streets of the na-
tion’s capital — a battalion of federal agents, troops and police designed to restore order,
but one that critics say carries grim parallels to heavy-handed foreign regimes.

 

Barr was tapped by President Trump to direct the national response to protests and riots
over police misconduct since the police-custody death of George Floyd in Minneapolis.
The attorney general has focused much of his attention on the District, where unrest and
arrests swelled over the weekend before a jarring clash Monday to clear peaceful protesters
from outside the White House — an order Barr issued personally. By Tuesday night, as he
sat in the FBI command center until nearly midnight, the city’s mood seemed to have
calmed.

One Justice Department official said Barr’s strategy is to “flood the zone” by putting “the
maximum amount of law enforcement out on the street. ... The peacefulness is in large
part due to the large law enforcement presence.” Like others, this official spoke on the
condition of anonymity to describe internal deliberations.

While large protests Tuesday night included thousands of people breaking the city’s cur-
few, Barr and his advisers reason that as long as such activities are peaceful, they are not
going to be challenged by federal enforcers.

Still, while Barr may be restoring order, his outsize role in the administration has made
many uncomfortable. Monday’s episode outside the White House has proven especially
galling for some, including Trump’s former defense secretary, Jim Mattis, who on Wed-
nesday issued a pointed rebuke.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200604/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. Esper, Mattis at odds with Trump Barr seeks to subdue D.C. protests with show of force

“We know that we are better than the abuse of executive authority that we witnessed in
Lafayette Square,” the retired general wrote. “We must reject and hold accountable those
in office who would make a mockery of our Constitution.”

The display of federal might — in the District and other restive cities where protests have
turned destructive — includes military vehicles at intersections, helicopter flyovers, fed-
eral law enforcement agents assigned to patrol and investigate possible crimes, street clo-
sures and checkpoints. Troubling to some has been the presence of personnel, some heav-
ily armed, clad in tactical attire bearing no identifiable insignia. The Justice Department
has in the past criticized such a lack of transparency, saying it foments mistrust.

On the night he took charge of the effort, Barr walked the streets to see for himself how
personnel were deployed.

Some law enforcement experts contend the dramatic scenes are counterproductive in the
long run, affirming the very criticism leveled by protesters — that police and government
officials treat citizens unjustly.

“The heavy hand is a smack in the face, and the danger is that it may make things worse,”
said Dennis Kenney, a professor at John Jay College of Criminal Justice in New York with
expertise in police response to protests. “It really does communicate something about
where those who are in charge think our society sits right now. We’re in the process of
demonstrating to the people who are out in the streets that they are right to be there.”
Kenney said he was struck by the president’s walk Monday to a church near the White
House, under a phalanx of armed guards. It reminded him of when he advised a govern-
ment minister in Yemen that he should use a soft touch on protests. The minister refused
and, in six months, could not safely travel anywhere beyond his home and his office.

The Justice Department official said such criticism was unwarranted. “What would be the
alternative, letting people burn down the city?” the official asked. “The force is necessary
to restore order and civility so people can go ahead with their lives because, prior to this,
things were really getting out of hand. This only benefits everyone.”

Barr has said the government must “dominate” the streets to restore order and put an end
to the looting, rioting and vandalism that has marred Washington, New York, Minneapolis
and elsewhere.

From the FBI command center, the attorney general coordinates with the Pentagon anda
variety of federal agencies fanned out across the capital. Tennessee and Florida announced
Wednesday they were sending National Guard troops to the city to further beef up those
efforts. Barr has also ordered agents with the FBI, Drug Enforcement Administration, U.S.
Marshals and the Bureau of Prisons to help protect the city.

Aides said Barr has also logged hours at FBI headquarters, overseeing the national re-
sponse efforts, focused not just on the broad efforts but the minutiae of the government
response.

Justice Department officials took the sharp drop in arrests Tuesday night as a sign the
strategy is working. While crowds of protesters were as large or larger than previous
nights, there was far less property destruction or violence compared with previous
evenings.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200604/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. Esper, Mattis at odds with Trump Barr seeks to subdue D.C. protests with show of force

A second Justice Department official said Wednesday that there has been “a tremendous
amount of restraint” shown by D.C. police and other law enforcement agencies. The official
said that so far, none of those arrested have been accused of being part of extremist
groups, but investigators are still examining the backgrounds of some and scrutinizing so-
cial media posts for evidence of anyone who may be organizing, orchestrating or encour-
aging violence.

“We can exploit phones, data communications to see if there is a coordinated command
and control. That’s what we’re looking for,” the official said.

Acentral focus in Barr’s effort is steering criminal cases into the federal system, where
suspects are likely to face stiffer prison sentences. As part of that push, two Minnesota
men were charged Tuesday with firebombing a local court office building.

According to a criminal complaint, Garrett Patrick Ziegler, 24, and Fornandous Cortez
Henderson, 32, were charged with arson and possession of molotov cocktails after
detectives in Apple Valley found car keys near the scene that led them to the suspects.

The case was turned over to federal prosecutors and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco,
Firearms and Explosives.

As in the Minnesota case, ATF is helping local police with arson investigations related to
the unrest, while other agents are helping patrol public spaces. Other federal agencies are
also taking up cases involving violence or vandalism related to protests. About a dozen
people have been charged federally in such cases, and scores more are under investigation,
according to officials.

On Wednesday evening, authorities announced the arrest of three men in Las Vegas on
charges of conspiring to cause destruction at protests in that city. Federal authorities said
the three men identified with the “boogaloo” movement, a far-right extremist ideology
that seeks to spark a civil war.

The DEA has received special permission to go beyond its standard legal mandate of inves-
tigating drug-related crimes to also investigate crimes related to the protests, according to
an internal document first reported by Buzzfeed News.

The Justice Department authorization, which lasts for 14 days, allows the DEA to conduct
“covert surveillance” and share intelligence with state and local officials, as well as patrol
public places and make arrests for non-drug crimes as officials see fit. A DEA spokes-
woman declined to comment.

It is unusual for federal agents to engage in such duties, but they have been pressed into
service by Barr, who has called the public vandalism and violence “domestic terrorism.”
Some federal agents deployed around Washington have been wearing military-style tacti-
cal gear with no markings to indicate their names or the agencies for which they work. Six
years ago, the Justice Department criticized the Ferguson, Mo., police department for al-
lowing its officers to work without wearing nameplates.

“Officers wearing name plates while in uniform is a basic component of transparency and
accountability,” the Justice Department’s civil rights division wrote. “It is a near-univer-
sal requirement of sound policing practices. ... Allowing officers to remain anonymous
when they interact with the public contributes to mistrust and undermines accountabil-
ity.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200604/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. Esper, Mattis at odds with Trump Barr seeks to subdue D.C. protests with show of force

A Justice Department official said there has been no instruction for federal agents to not
identify themselves, but the mobilization happened so quickly, “they’re using the gear
that’s available. ... There is so much surveillance that’s going on that I feel confident noth-
ing is going to happen here that isn’t video recorded.”

Kenney, the policing expert, said federal law enforcement agents are a poor fit for what
should be the twin goals of government: using National Guard troops to protect the pro-
testers and using police in reserve to pursue any lawbreakers.

“What the DEA and all the other federal law enforcement agencies are going to contribute
is totally beyond me,” said Kenney. “They’re of little value and should be cleared out.”
Democrats have also criticized Barr’s handling of the crisis, particularly the decision to
clear protesters just before the president’s walk to get his photo taken outside a church. On
Wednesday, four senior House Democrats wrote to Barr seeking answers about that deci-
sion and declaring that “the use of federal personnel to prevent American citizens from
exercising their Constitutional right to peaceably assemble represents a direct threat to
our democracy.”

The FBI’S Washington Field Office, which holds the command center where Barr oversees
the response, issued a statement saying it “respects the rights of individuals to peacefully
exercise their First Amendment rights. We are working actively and closely with our local,
state, and federal law enforcement partners and are committed to apprehending violent
instigators who are exploiting legitimate, peaceful protests and engaging in violations of
federal law.”

The attorney general has also instructed the FBI’S joint terrorism task forces to assist in
the efforts. Officials said agents in the JTTFS have been assigned to gather video and photo
evidence of possible lawbreakers, as well as take tips from local police about suspects or
cases. One official said the JTTFS’ work on identifying criminal activity related to the
protests does not mean the agency has changed its rules for how it uses surveillance pow-
ers toward Americans — the legal limitations around national security intelligence au-
thorities still apply.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200604/page/1/textview 414
