2020. 6. 17. Brazil: Government obscures data on virus as deaths surge.

Brazil: Government obscures data on virus as deaths surge.
Government disputes accuracy, stops showing cumulative numbers

The Washington Post : 8 Jun 2020 - A1 - BY TERRENCE MCCOY terrence.mccoy@washpost.com

As Brazil posts some of the highest daily coronavirus death totals in the world, President
Jair Bolsonaro is reducing the amount of data his government is releasing to the public.
Since the beginning of the pandemic, the country’s Health Ministry has maintained de-
tailed and robust data on the spread and reach of the disease that has now officially in-
fected more than 672,000 people here and killed nearly 36,000. But that information dis-
appeared from a government website on Saturday, to be replaced by a daily tally that
shows only the numbers from the previous 24 hours.

The sudden removal of the cumulative data touched off an avalanche of criticism as people
in cities returned to their balconies to bang pots and detractors suggested the federal gov-
ernment was trying to obscure the gravity of a public health crisis it has done little to ad-
dress. President Jair Bolsonaro, who continues to dismiss the disease even as it maims his
country, has repeatedly questioned the accuracy of the data and grown increasingly as-
sertive in his efforts to restrict access to it.

His administration rescheduled the daily release of data last week so that it would come
out after newspaper deadlines and nightly news programs. Bolsonaro said Friday that the
delay “stopped the stories in the ‘ National Journal,’ ” a popular nightly news show.

One of Brazil’s top health officials, appointed earlier this month, also sought to undermine
the country’s coronavirus numbers on Friday. Carlos Wizard, the health ministry’s new
secretary of science and technology, said a new count should be available within a month.
“The number that we have today is fantastical or manipulated.” Carlos Wizard, health of-
ficial

“T believe there will be more trustworthy data because the number that we have today is
fantastical or manipulated,” he said.

Without offering evidence, he said that data had been inflated by local health officials who,
“purely in the interest of getting bigger city and state budgets, are saying everyone had
covid.”

State secretaries of health said the allegation betrayed a “profound ignorance.”

“His disgusting comment, disproved by any ethical sense, humanity and or respect, war-
rants our contempt, repudiation and disgust,” the National Council of Health Secretaries
said in a statement. “We are not merchants of death.”

The growing lack of transparency underscores how completely Bolsonaro has taken con-
trol of the country’s federal response to the pandemic. He fired former health secretary
Luiz Henrique Mandetta after they publicly clashed over the need to maintain social dis-
tancing and temporarily close nonessential businesses. He pushed out Mandetta’s replace-
ment, Nelson Teich, after Teich resisted his pressure to advocate the use of the anti-
malarial drug chloroquine in coronavirus cases, despite potentially fatal side effects.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200608/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Brazil: Government obscures data on virus as deaths surge.

Bolsonaro has tapped a military official with no medical training as the interim health
minister.

Brazil has long struggled to maintain accurate coronavirus data. Until now, however, the
concern was that it was underestimating the severity of the crisis — not the other way
around. Unable to buy or produce enough tests, Brazil was at one time testing 32 times
fewer people than the United States and 12 times fewer than Iran — but still posting one of
the world’s largest outbreaks. The scant testing has led researchers to estimate that
Brazil’s outbreak is anywhere between five and 15 times worse than the official register.
Heloisa Traiano contributed to this report.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200608/page/1/textview 2/2
