2020. 6. 17. Jobless rate will improve, but slowly, Fed predicts

Jobless rate will improve, but slowly, Fed predicts
Chief: Unemployment ‘historically high’; Congress must do more

The Dallas Morning News - 11 Jun 2020: 1A - By HEATHER LONG

The Federal Reserve predicts falling unemployment but a slow recovery for the U.S. econ-
omy.

WASHINGTON — Federal Reserve leaders predict a slow recovery for the U.S. economy,
with unemployment falling to 9.3% by the end of this year and to 6.5% by the end of 2021,
after millions of Americans lost their jobs in the recession caused by the coronavirus out-
break.

Fed Chair Jerome Powell stressed Wednesday that the economy probably will need aid from
the central bank and Congress for a long time. He repeatedly highlighted his concern that
millions of Americans will become permanently unemployed from this crisis as the com-
panies they used to work for go out of business or their old jobs are eliminated.
“Unemployment remains historically high,” Powell said during a news conference Wed-
nesday. “The downturn has not fallen equally on all Americans. The rise in joblessness has
been especially severe for lowerwage workers, women, African Americans and Hispanics.”
The Fed also announced that it will continue to support the economy with historically low
interest rates. The benchmark interest rate will remain near zero, probably through at
least 2022, and the central bank’s extensive bondbuying programs will continue “at least
at the current pace” for the foreseeable future.

“We're not thinking about raising rates. We’re not even thinking about thinking about
raising rates,” Powell said.

Stocks initially rallied on the Fed news, but the gains evaporated as Powell said he was in
“risk management” mode, presenting a cautious view of the main hurdles the economy
still

faces.

One of the biggest concerns at the Fed and beyond is that the pandemic and subsequent re-
covery probably will deepen inequality in the United States, possibly for years to come. The
Fed has limited tools to use in emergency situations, and those tools tend to help buoy
Wall Street more than Main Street.

Low interest rates have triggered a massive rebound in the stock market in recent weeks
and made it cheaper for Americans to borrow money to buy homes or vehicles and for
businesses to take out loans. Mortgage rates fell to an alltime low at the end of May, caus-
ing a surge in homebuying, even during the pandemic. But Americans need to have sub-
stantial savings to be able to invest in the market or purchase a home.

Powell stressed the limits of the Fed’s ability to help the economy, suggesting that
Congress needs to do more to aid workers who can’t get their jobs back this summer and
small business owners who don’t make it through this pandemic through no fault of their
own.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 1/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Jobless rate will improve, but slowly, Fed predicts

“Many borrowers will benefit from these [Fed] programs, as will the overall economy,”
Powell said, but he noted that there are limits to what the Fed can do and that “direct fiscal
support may be needed” to help prevent “longlasting damage” to the U.S. economy.

The Fed’s forecasts are notably rosier than many others, including from the Congressional
Budget Office, which predicts that unemployment will remain above 11% at the end of this
year and will fall to 9.3% by the end of 2021.

Since midmarch, the Fed has slashed interest rates to historic lows and pumped more than
$2.8 trillion into the economy by buying up Treasury bonds, mortgage bonds and even
some corporate and municipal bonds for the first time.

Powell has been reticent to say publicly what, specifically, he thinks Congress should do to
help people or businesses that may be left behind and struggle to recover this summer. But
he continued his message that policymakers have to be ready to act.

“It’s possible we will need to do more. It’s possible Congress will need to do more,” he
said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 1/page/1/textview 2/2
