2020. 6. 17. Asia vs. West: Scientists ponder vastly uneven death rates.

Asia vs. West: Scientists ponder vastly uneven death rates.

The Washington Post - 29 May 2020 - A1 - BY SIMON DENYER AND JOEL ACHENBACH simon.denyer@washpost.com
joel.achenbach@washpost.com Achenbach reported from Washington. Akiko Kashiwagi in Tokyo and Chris Mooney in Wash-
ington contributed to this report.

TOKYO — It is one of the many mysteries of the coronavirus pandemic: Why has the death
toll from covid-19 apparently been lower in Asia than in Western Europe and North Amer-
ica?

 

Even allowing for different testing policies and counting methods, and questions over full
disclosure of cases, stark differences in mortality across the world have caught the atten-
tion of researchers trying to crack the coronavirus code.

Parts of Asia reacted quickly to the threat and largely started social distancing earlier on.
But researchers are also examining other factors, including differences in genetics and im-
mune system responses, separate virus strains and regional contrasts in obesity levels and
general health.

What are the numbers?

China, where the virus emerged late last year in Wuhan, has recorded fewer than 5,000
deaths, which translates to three deaths per million inhabitants. Japan has around seven
per million, Pakistan six, South Korea and Indonesia five, India three and Thailand fewer
than one per million. Vietnam, Cambodia and Mongolia say they have recorded zero covid-
19-related deaths.

Compare that with about 100 deaths per million in Germany, about 180 in Canada, nearly
300 in the United States and more than 500 in Britain, Italy and Spain.

Scientists at Japan’s Chiba University plotted the trajectory of the virus across the world
and said they noticed stark regional disparities.

“That means we need to take into consideration regional differences first, before analyz-
ing what policies and other factors are affecting the spread of infection in any given coun-
try,” said Akihiro Hisaka of the university’s Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200529/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. Asia vs. West: Scientists ponder vastly uneven death rates.

The conventional wisdom

The baseline assumption, at the moment, is that the virus — officially SARS- COV-2 —
mutates the way all viruses do and is just as innately contagious and lethal in one part of
the world as in another.

“We are all facing the same bug with the same general arsenal of immune responses,” said
Jeffrey Shaman, an epidemiologist at Columbia University. “There are differences in test-
ing, reporting, control from country to country. And there are differences in rates of hy-
pertension, chronic lung disease, et cetera, on a country-by-country basis.”

Part of the reason for the high number of deaths in the United States and Western Europe
may lie in an initial reluctance to react to an epidemic that seemed distant and unthreaten-
ing. In Asia, meanwhile, previous experience with the SARS and MERS epidemics enabled
much faster responses to the new threat.

Taiwan, for example, has been widely praised for its speedy response to the epidemic, in-
cluding early screening of air passengers from Wuhan. South Korea built a massive pro-
gram of testing, tracing and isolating patients.

But in Japan and India, two very different countries, the relatively low death toll has baf-
fled many scientists. Similar mysteries have emerged from Pakistan to the Philippines.
Weather and culture a reason?

Hot and humid weather could be a factor in places such as Cambodia, Vietnam and
Singapore. Several studies have suggested that heat and humidity can slow, although not
stop, the spread of the virus, just as is seen with influenza and with coronaviruses that
cause common colds. But some equatorial countries, including Ecuador and Brazil, have
seen many cases and deaths linked to covid-19.

Demographics also play a role in regional disparities. Africa’s generally younger popula-
tion may have been more resistant than northern Italy’s older communities, for example.
In Japan, which has the world’s oldest population, different reasons are being explored.
There is a widespread belief in Japan that good hygiene and habits, like wearing masks and
avoiding handshakes, helped slow the spread of the virus, while universal health care and
the country’s emphasis on protecting the elderly may have lowered the death toll.

What about different strains?

Research by a team at Cambridge University showed how the virus mutated as it left East
Asia and traveled to Europe, noting the possibility that the initial strain may have been
“immunologically or environmentally adapted to a large section of the East Asian popula-
tion” and needed to mutate to overcome resistance outside that region.

Peter Forster, the geneticist who led that study, said there is “very limited clinical data” on
how the various virus strains interacted with different populations. He noted, however,
that the question “should be followed up” on whether different strains explained con-
trasting mortality rates.

A team of scientists at Los Alamos National Laboratory also argued that a more highly
contagious strain of the virus has taken hold in Europe and spread in the United States —
but other experts have said the significance of emergent strains remains unclear.

“Tt could just be an accident that whoever had that mutant went to the most rock festivals
and nightclubs and transmitted to the most people,” said Jeremy Luban, a virologist at the

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200529/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. Asia vs. West: Scientists ponder vastly uneven death rates.

University of Massachusetts Medical School. “But the other possibility is that that strain is
more transmissible.”

Genes and immune systems

Nobel laureate Tasuku Honjo, a Japanese physician-scientist and immunologist, said peo-
ple with Asian and European ancestry have enormous differences in the human leukocyte
antigen (HLA) haplotype, genes that control the immune system’s response to a virus.
That might help explain lower Asian death rates, he said, but is unlikely to be the only rea-
son.

Scientists at Chiba University said a whole range of possible genetic factors might condi-
tion the body’s response to the virus and deserved further study — even while stressing
that there is no evidence yet to back up the idea.

Different immune responses could also play a role.

Tatsuhiko Kodama of the University of Tokyo said preliminary studies show that Japanese
people’s immune systems tend to react to the novel coronavirus as though they had previ-
ous exposure, and notes that there are centuries of history of coronaviruses emerging from
East Asia.

“The enigma of lower death rates in East Asia can be explained by the presence of immu-
nity,” he said.

Other studies have suggested that rates of Bacille CalmetteGuerin (BCG) vaccination might
have played a role, because the anti-tuberculosis shot can potentially cause immune-
boosting response at the cell level.

“Our hypothesis is that BCG, plus infection or exposure to TB, would be protective,” said
Tsuyoshi Miyakawa of Fujita Health University.

But Japan has a record of BCG vaccination similar to that of France — albeit with a differ-
ent strain of the vaccine — and yet a very different covid-19 mortality rate.

Experts are divided, but clinical trials are underway.

Megan Murray, an epidemiologist at Harvard Medical School, said another factor worth
exploring is differences in microbiomes — the trillions of bacteria that reside in a person’s
gut and play a huge role in immune response.

“Microbiomes are very different in different places. People eat very different food,” she
said.

Obesity under study. But don’t discount random chance.

There’s something else that many Asian countries have in common — much lower rates of
obesity than in the West.

Obesity is a leading risk factor for serious covid-19 illness. Just over 4 percent of Japanese
people are classified as obese, and less than 5 percent of South Koreans. That compares
with 20 percent or more in Western Europe, and 36 percent of people in the United States,
according to the World Health Organization.

But random chance is also at play. Russia, for example, looked remarkably unscathed by
the virus for a couple of months, and now it’s a hot spot. Cases are now rising in India after
a relatively flat curve.

All the epidemiological research on the virus suffers from incomplete data, and any con-
clusions drawn from the initial numbers may melt away as new data emerges. It is still

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200529/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. Asia vs. West: Scientists ponder vastly uneven death rates.

early in the pandemic, experts say, and the hard-science questions take time.

In any case, it doesn’t change the need for every country to remain on high alert.

“All of the strains that are circulating on the planet,” said Umass professor Luban, “seem
to be capable of killing people.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200529/page/1/textview 4/4
