2020. 6. 17. Trump seizes on upbeat jobs report as he fights two crises

Trump seizes on upbeat jobs report as he fights two crises

The Washington Post : 6 Jun 2020 - A1-: BY PHILIP RUCKER, ANNIE LINSKEY AND JEFF STEIN

President Trump grasped onto Friday’s better-than-anticipated jobless numbers as a life
raft for his floundering reelection campaign, arguing that the economy is springing back
from the coronavirus pandemic like “a rocket ship” and claiming personal credit for its re-
silience.

 

The May unemployment rate of 13.3 percent was lower than the 20 percent many experts
had predicted and an undeniably positive development for a nation reeling from the spring
shutdown. And for a president battered by his handling of one crisis after another and slip-
ping further behind Democrat Joe Biden in virtually every poll, the news delivered a wel-
come salvation.

Delivering remarks in the Rose Garden, a buoyant Trump said the rebound in hiring was
his answer to the fury over racial injustice that has been coursing through America’s cities
since the death of George Floyd in police custody.

“It’s the greatest thing that can happen for race relations, for the African American com-
munity,

for the Asian American, for the Hispanic American community, for women, for every-
thing,” Trump said when a reporter asked for his plan to address systemic racism. “Be-
cause our country is so strong. And that’s what my plan is. We’re going to have the strong-
est economy in the world.”

Trump added, “Hopefully George is looking down right now and saying, ‘ There’s a great
thing that’s happening for our country.’ This is a great day for him. It’s a great day for ev-
erybody.”

Floyd’s nationally televised memorial service was Thursday, and other services are
planned for Saturday and Monday.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200606/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. Trump seizes on upbeat jobs report as he fights two crises

Trump’s self-congratulatory victory lap masked the pain and suffering of many Ameri-
cans, roughly 30 million of whom are receiving unemployment benefits.

And his claim on race relations is undermined by the data itself, which show that the un-
employment rate among blacks and Asian Americans ticked up in May to 16.8 percent and
15 percent, respectively, even as it fell among whites to 12.4 percent. Hispanic unemploy-
ment also dropped slightly to 17.6 percent.

Trump’s declaration of a swift rebound is politically risky, considering the virus continues
to ravage the country, many businesses remain at least partially closed, and this summer’s
economic trajectory cannot yet be determined.

Biden, the former vice president and presumptive Democratic nominee, accused Trump of
prematurely “spiking the ball” when so many Americans remain jobless and are struggling
to feed their families.

“I was disturbed to see the president crowing this morning — basically hanging a ‘ mis-
sion accomplished’ banner out there when there’s so much more work to be done,” Biden
said. He added, “He’s out there spiking the ball, completely oblivious to the tens of mil-
lions of people who are facing the greatest struggle of their lives.”

Biden argued that the depth of the nation’s economic devastation is directly attributable to
the Trump administration’s failures to manage the pandemic.

“The president who takes no responsibility for costing millions and millions of Americans
their jobs deserves no credit when a fraction of them return,” Biden said.

Biden said he is preparing to release a more robust jobs plan that he said will include tril-
lions of dollars in infrastructure spending as well as investments in small businesses. He
indicated he had delayed his rollout of that plan because of the nationwide demonstrations
ignited by last month’s death of Floyd, a black man whose brutal treatment by police in
Minneapolis was caught on camera.

Biden denounced Trump for invoking Floyd’s death in his Rose Garden celebration. “Ge-
orge Floyd’s last words — ‘I can’t breathe.’ ‘I can’t breathe.’ — have echoed across our
nation,” Biden said. “For the president to try to put any other words in the mouth of Ge-
orge Floyd is, frankly, despicable.”

Trump had long planned to make the economy his central pitch to voters, banking on a
boom cycle to secure a second term. But the pandemic, which shuttered scores of busi-
nesses and effectively froze entire industries, scrambled that strategy, though polls show
Trump’s handling of the economy to be one of his strongest attributes.

The unemployment rate soared to 14.7 percent in April from 4.4 percent in March, accord-
ing to the Labor Department. Many economists predicted it would rise further in May be-
cause of the pandemic.

But the department’s statistics showed the economy gained 2.5 million jobs in May, as
many states began to relax coronavirus restrictions. Trump reveled Friday in so many ex-
perts getting it wrong.

“I think it was probably the greatest miscalculation in the history of business shows,”
Trump said, though he praised a handful of cable news personalities, including Maria Bar-
tiromo of Fox Business Network, for having “had confidence in me.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200606/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. Trump seizes on upbeat jobs report as he fights two crises

Since the pandemic forced the closure of much of the economy in March, Trump has
longed to play the role of cheerleader for the nation’s economy — even when doing so
meant playing down the safety risks and contradicting his own administration’s public
health guidelines.

Friday’s jobs numbers gave Trump his best opportunity in recent months to play that role.
Soon after their 8:30 a.m. release, the president announced on Twitter he would hold a
news conference, and aides scrambled to set up the Rose Garden for the occasion.

It was not a news conference, however, because Trump did not take questions from re-
porters. Rather, he delivered a 40-minute stream-of-consciousness monologue that cov-
ered a smorgasbord of topics, before signing a bill granting more flexibility to businesses
beset by the pandemic. At one point, advisers and attendees were given water bottles and
cups to keep from overheating under the broiling sun.

“Today is probably, if you think of it, the greatest comeback in American history,” Trump
said. Referring to the recovery models predicted by economists, the president added,
“We've been talking about the ‘ V.’ This is better than a V. This is a rocket ship. This is far
better than a V. ... Willi tb ea‘ V’? A‘U ’? An‘ L’? They had no idea.”

Trump used the numbers to try to pressure Democratic governors to move faster to reopen
their economies, arguing that Florida, Georgia and other Republican-led states that were
aggressive to reopen are now “doing tremendous business, and this is what these numbers
are all about.”

Trump used the stagecraft of Friday’s announcement to try to send the message that
America had turned the page on the pandemic, even as the infections and deaths continue.
At recent past events in the Rose Garden, seats for aides, reporters and other guests have
been positioned at least six feet apart, in keeping with the federal government’s social dis-
tancing guidelines.

But shortly before Friday’s event began, White House staffers repositioned reporters’ seats
significantly closer together. Jonathan Karl of ABC News, president of the White House
Correspondents’ Association, said that the White House press office explained that the de-
cision to move the chairs close together was made because “it looks better.”

“The health of the press corps should not be put in jeopardy because the White House
wants reporters to be a prop for a ‘news conference’ where the president refused to answer
any questions,” Karl said in a statement.

Trump’s campaign team is making plans to build a messaging strategy built around the
economic turnaround. “The doomsday scenario for Democrats is the economy returning to
life,” Trump campaign spokesman Tim Murtaugh said.

David Axelrod, who served as the top strategist on Barack

Obama’s presidential campaigns, said betting on the economy is an exceedingly risky
strategy for Trump considering the pandemic’s uncertainty.

“It may be that the president’s victory lap today seems very off-key a couple months from
now when we’re still struggling with this crisis, and it may have seemed off-key to the
tens of millions of Americans who are still unemployed,” Axelrod said. “He was so eager to
take a victory lap that he took six. He just kept going around the track, and it’s a little early
for that.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200606/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. Trump seizes on upbeat jobs report as he fights two crises

Many economists warn that the jobs report could in part reflect the massive federal aid ap-
proved by Congress in late March, rather than the economy’s underlying strength. The
federal government poured an additional $1.25 trillion into the economy in the third quar-
ter, with much of that funding taking effect between the April and May jobs reports. Much
of that federal aid is now set to peter out, with Americans spending their $1,200 stimulus
checks and a $600-perweek increase in unemployment benefits set to expire at the end of
July.

Lawmakers have been at an impasse over the next stimulus package. Congressional
Democrats have pushed trillions in additional spending to prevent the economy from fall-
ing into a protracted recession, while the White House and Senate Majority Leader Mitch
Mcconnell (R-KY.) have urged a “wait-andsee” approach.

Trump on Friday said the White House will be asking for additional stimulus money, “de-
spite the numbers and how good they are,” citing low interest rates that make it cheap for
the government to borrow. He also said he will seek a payroll tax cut and special assistance
for restaurants.

Critics of additional spending seized on the jobs report to bolster their case.

“It takes a lot of the wind out of the sails of any” new plan, said Stephen Moore, an outside
economic adviser to the White House. “We don’t need it now. ... There’s no reason to have
a major spending bill. The sense of urgent crisis is very greatly dissipated by the report.”
But some other economists said they fear Trump could hurt the economic recovery by
pumping the brakes on federal aid prematurely. Ernie Tedeschi, who served in the Obama
administration, said it would be akin to “stopping an antibiotic prematurely because you
start to feel better. If we let support expire too soon, we could have a doubledip downturn.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200606/page/1/textview 4/4
