2020. 6. 17. Paltry donations in time of crisis

Paltry donations in time of crisis

The 50 richest Americans have given less than 0.1 percent of their combined
wealth toward pandemic relief, according to a Washington Post survey

The Washington Post : 8 Jun 2020 - A1 - BY ROXANNE ROBERTS AND WILL HOBSON

Worth $1.6 trillion, U.S. billionaires give away only a tiny fraction.

 

America’s love-hate affair with billionaires took an uncomfortable twist this spring: As the
coronavirus spread across the country, both fans and critics wondered what these titans of
capitalism would do to address this devastating health and economic crisis.

The answer so far: Not much, when accounting for their vast personal fortunes.

A Washington Post survey of the nation’s 50 wealthiest people and families, who have a
collective net worth of nearly $1.6 trillion, found that their publicly announced donations
amount to about $1 billion, which sounds like a lot of money but adds up to less than 0.1
percent of their combined wealth. More than half of these billionaires have publicly do-
nated cash and a few say they have given something — money or in-kind contributions —
but declined to specify how much. But almost a third have not announced any donations
and declined to comment or did not reply to requests for comment.

And even many of the billionaires who have announced donations to covid-19 relief efforts
have given amounts that are relatively paltry when compared with the median net worth of
an American household, which registers at $97,300, a number that accounts for a family’s
assets and subtracting debts, according to the federal Survey of Consumer Finances. To put
billionaires’ covid-19 giving in perspective, The Post used this figure to calculate what
each of their donations would equate to for the median American donor.

Only two billionaires have really stepped into the spotlight: Bill Gates, the dean of billion-
aire philanthropy, and a surprising newcomer to charitable giving: Twitter’s Jack Dorsey.
Gates, who had a net worth of $103 billion in April when The Post began its survey, has
spearheaded an aggressive and comprehensive public campaign to mitigate and eradicate

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200608/page/1/textview 116
2020. 6. 17. Paltry donations in time of crisis

the virus, spending about $300 million to date through the Bill and Melinda Gates Founda-
tion. The foundation, which has give more than $50 billion in grants since its inception,
“is focused on investing its resources where governments can’t, and corporations won't,”
Gates said in an interview. Gates has emerged as a vocal leader during the pandemic, using
his decades of work fighting global disease as a base of knowledge to offer guidance and
strategy on how to deal with the spread of the coronavirus. In terms of donations from his
personal wealth, for the median American donor, Gates’s giving equates to about $283.
But the most publicly generous billionaire to date is Dorsey,

who ranks 147th on the list of wealthiest Americans, according to Forbes. In early April,
Dorsey pledged $1 billion of his shares in the mobile payment company Square — about 28
percent of his then- $3.6 billion net worth — to covid-19 relief and charities. For the me-
dian American, Dorsey’s giving equates to more than $27,000.

Dorsey, who has disbursed more than $88 million since early April and tracks his giving in
an open-source spreadsheet, made the announcement in tweets: “Why now? The needs
are increasingly urgent, and I want to see the impact in my lifetime. .. . 1 hope this inspires
others to do something similar.”

Months later, Dorsey’s call for action by America’s super-rich appears to have been largely
ignored.

Amazon’s Jeff Bezos, the wealthiest man in the world with a fortune of $143 billion and
also the owner of The Washington Post, gave $100 million to Feeding America and up to
$25 million for All in WA, a statewide relief effort in Washington. For the median Ameri-
can, Bezos’s giving is the equivalent of donating $85. His aerospace company, Blue Origin,
pledged to 3-D print face shields for front-line workers but did not disclose the value of
that contribution.

In terms of public giving relative to his net worth, hedge-fund billionaire Ray Dalio, whose
net worth is $18 billion, ranks as the most generous among the 50 wealthiest Americans.
He has pledged more than $100 million to efforts including child care for hospital workers,
food for the needy, and laptops for children of lower-income families. His giving to date,
for the median American, equates to about $589.

Among the richest Americans, Dalio is the exception, not the rule when it comes to giving
for coronavirus relief.

Hedge fund manager Steven Cohen, worth $14 billion, has donated more than $6 million to
covid-19 relief efforts, or about $43 for the median American. Los Angeles Rams owner
Stan Kroenke, worth $10 billion, has given $500,000 publicly to launch a covid-19 re-
sponse fund, which equates to $5 for the median American. Media magnate Donald New-
house, worth $12.5 billion, has given $1 million to the World Health Organization.

“We are humbled by the enormity of the human suffering caused by this virus and the
challenge of helping so many in need,” Newhouse said in a statement announcing the gift
in late March.

To the median American, Newhouse’s gift was the equivalent of $8.

Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg, worth $67 billion, personally has given $58 million
for medical research and aid for the Bay Area — which equates to $84 for the median
American — and his company has donated $100 million to small businesses. The Walmart

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200608/page/1/textview 2/6
2020. 6. 17. Paltry donations in time of crisis

Foundation donated $25 million to food banks and local community relief, but none of the
five members of the Walton family on the Top 50 list — with a total net worth of nearly
$200 billion — have announced any public donations. Beloved investing guru Warren Buf-
fett lent his private jet to deliver medical supplies to New York and voiced an animated
public service announcement on how to properly wash hands, but has not made any public
monetary gifts related to the pandemic.

John Menard Jr., worth $15 billion, is the 80-year-old founder of Menards, the Midwestern
chain of home improvement stores. In March, the company publicly apologized after
Michigan’s attorney general accused the chain of price gouging on face masks, bleach and
other cleaning supplies. Menard is among the prominent business leaders named by
Trump to coronavirus economic advisory committees. Neither he nor his company have
announced any coronavirus-related donations, and he declined to comment for this story.
The philanthropy of the billionaire class tends to reflect their personal histories and pas-
sions. Former New York mayor and presidential candidate Mike Bloomberg, worth $52 bil-
lion, has donated close to $75 million — about $139 to the median American — and tweets
almost every day about strategies for combating the virus — including criticism of the
Trump administration’s response. L.A. Clippers owner Steve Ballmer, worth $62 billion,
also donated $75 million to three cities — Detroit, Los Angeles, and Seattle — where he
has close ties.

Ballmer’s giving, to the median American donor, is the equivalent of $118.

And what to make of Tesla’s Elon Musk, worth $37 billion, who first dismissed concerns
(“The coronavirus panic is dumb”), then loudly announced he was giving hospitals 1,000
much-needed ventilators — which instead turned out to be airway pressure machines. Or
Rupert Murdoch, worth $16 billion, whose spokesman suggested he was giving for coron-
avirus relief anonymously, although any such charitable giving would be uncharacteristic:
In 2014, Inside Philanthropy reported that Murdoch’s personal foundation hadn’t made a
single donation in six years. In 2016, federal tax records show, Murdoch dissolved the
foundation. “There are causes that they’re supporting. . . . It’s just something that we’re
not really sharing right now,” said Eric Kuo, senior vice president at the Rubenstein public
relations firm, which represents the Murdoch family.

Spokespeople for some of these billionaires pointed to money given by their corporations,
not personally or through foundations. A spokesman for Blackstone chief executive
Stephen Schwarzman didn’t disclose any personal charitable spending, but highlighted
$15 million the investment firm has given to relief efforts in New York. Schwarzman is
personally worth almost $17 billion. The Mars family, worth $54 billion, donated $20 mil-
lion in cash and in-kind donations from their company, but have disclosed no personal
giving.

These millions of much-needed aid are going to charities and other organizations desper-
ately trying to help people cope with health care, job loss and other casualties of the mo-
ment. And this is likely to be a long-running issue, possibly stretching into years, so
there’s plenty of time for billionaires to do and give more. But, given the resources avail-
able, some critics of the richest Americans say their initial public donations have been sur-
prisingly small in the face of this national emergency.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200608/page/1/textview 3/6
2020. 6. 17. Paltry donations in time of crisis

“T don’t mean to be uncharitable, but much of this is self-serving rubbish,” wrote former
labor secretary Robert Reich in a widely circulated column in the Guardian. “The amounts
involved are tiny relative to the fortunes behind them.”

The relative stinginess of some of America’s wealthiest, to their critics, is particularly out-
rageous because the financial devastation of the pandemic, so far, appears to have spared
many of them. From March through May, the fortunes of America’s billionaires grew by
more than $430 billion, according to a report released by the Institute for Policy Studies, a
liberal think tank that argues for expanded taxes for corporations and the wealthy.
“Billionaires did not cause this pandemic,” wrote Omar Ocampo and Chuck Collins, co-au-
thors of the report, in a recent op-ed. “But four decades of billionaire tax cuts have in-
creased the fragility of the public response infrastructure.”

The larger question, of course, is how much any private citizen, no matter how rich, can or
should do. The United States has more billionaires than any other country — about 630,
depending on the undulations of the stock market — although not as many per capita as a
dozen other countries, including Sweden and Ireland. And the richest Americans have
staggering fortunes, especially compared with the rest of the population. But even all that
money can’t adequately address a global pandemic.

“The level of human suffering is extraordinary,” says Darrell M. West, author of “Billion-
aires: Reflections on the Upper Crust.” “I haven’t seen a lot of effort other than Bill Gates.”
Even so, West explains, private donations are just a drop in the bucket. “The problem ex-
ists on such a massive scale that it’s really something government is going to have to ad-
dress, not private individuals. Billionaires have a lot of money, but if you’re talking about
spending trillions of dollars, that’s a government function, not a private function.”

Which is exactly what billionaire Carl Icahn thinks — addressing this pandemic is essen-
tially the job of the government, but he also plans to make some personal donations to
causes he believes are worthy.

The corporate raider turned investor, worth about $14 billion, says he’s committed to
spending at least $21 million on covid-19 relief efforts, starting with a $3 million donation
to the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai in New York. He’s also created an $18 mil-
lion covid-19 relief fund overseen by his charity, the Foundation for Greater Opportunity,
that has disbursed more than $3 million so far, including $2.5 million to the Robin Hood
Foundation, which works to fight poverty in New York.

Over the course of several phone conversations in recent weeks, Icahn — whose $21 mil-
lion pledge is the equivalent of the median American donating $147 — expressed an evolv-
ing perspective on the role America’s billionaires should play in covid19 crisis relief.

“1 think a lot of them have been giving, and have been charitable,” Icahn said in April.
“The government did a lot by increasing the unemployment insurance... a lot of people
aren’t that needy, because they’re actually making more money to not go to work.”

By late May, however, his opinion had changed.

“This is a time when the wealthy have to really step up, to help those in need,” Icahn said.
“T think the wealthy should be doing a whole lot more in this country.”

One thing billionaires could do more of, according to liberals, is pay taxes. The coronavirus
disaster has sharpened the already contentious political debate about income inequality.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200608/page/1/textview 4/6
2020. 6. 17. Paltry donations in time of crisis

Billionaires, many of whom were dismissive last year when Sen. Elizabeth Warren (D-
mass.) and Sen. Bernie Sanders (I-VT.) suggested they pay a greater share of taxes, have
argued they use their wealth to create jobs, innovate and solve problems with the effi-
ciency of business executives, not politicians. In terms of covid19, that has not proved to be
the case.

The very richest Americans now pay a smaller share of their income in taxes than they
have at any time since the 1910s, according to “The Triumph of Injustice” by Emmanuel
Saez and Gabriel Zucman, economics professors at University of California at Berkeley. In
1970, according to Saez and Zucman’s research, the richest Americans paid more than 50
percent of their income in taxes, twice as much as working-class individuals. By 2018, fol-
lowing the Trump tax cuts, that figure had dropped to 23 percent, on par or less than the
rate paid by steelworkers, schoolteachers and retirees.

The result: The richest 1 percent in the country own more wealth than the bottom 90 per-
cent combined. And the super rich keep getting super richer.

“What argument can justify that billionaires should pay less than each of us, and pay less
and less as they get wealthier and wealthier?” Saez and Zucman wrote in their book, which
published last year. “What principle could justify such an obviously perverse situation?”
Ten years ago, Gates and Buffett created the Giving Pledge, a promise from the richest in-
dividuals to donate at least half their wealth to philanthropic causes during their lifetimes
or when they die. So far, 15 of the 50 wealthiest Americans have signed on. The pledge is a
public gesture, not a binding contract, and it lets the rich decide when, how and why to
give away their fortunes.

Several billionaires, through spokespeople, said they only give money anonymously.

“The Fidelity Foundations and the Johnson family have had a long and significant com-
mitment to philanthropy,” wrote Vincent G. Loporchio, spokesman for Fidelity Invest-
ments and its chief executive, Abigail Johnson, worth $12.5 billion. “However, they have
never sought promotion for their charitable donations; it is well known in the Boston com-
munity that the grants are anonymous.”

Experts in billionaires and philanthropy are skeptical of this defense, however, pointing to
long-standing research that has found the most charitable Americans are the poorest —
many of whom tithe as part of their faith.

“America’s wealthy do not look impressive in their generosity, as a percent of their income
or wealth, compared to lower-income Americans,” said Rob Reich (no relation to the for-
mer labor secretary), a political science professor at Stanford and co-director of the Center
on Philanthropy and Civil Society.

If billionaires do give anonymously, there is no accountability or transparency.

But, to be fair, many do give millions publicly to a variety of causes that rely on their ongo-
ing support — education, climate change, space exploration — and have continued to do
so this year. The pandemic isn’t the only way to measure their giving, but it is a measure of
how they contribute during a national emergency. It’s not an either/or: Billionaires could
give away 90 percent of their money today and still live lives of unimaginable luxury.

“In general, the wealthy don’t give a lot,” says David Callahan, the founder of Inside Phi-
lanthropy, who calls billionaires’ pandemic response “shocking but not surprising.” Ina

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200608/page/1/textview 5/6
2020. 6. 17. Paltry donations in time of crisis

world where bad things happen all the time, they see no particular reason to change.

Why?

Billionaires, explains Callahan, historically give about 1 percent of their wealth to charity
every year. A big reason they don’t give more is that they think the world’s problems are
complicated and they’ re not confident of finding the best solutions — problems better ad-
dressed by the vast resources of governments rather than private individuals. “They see
philanthropy’s role as coming up with solutions that aren’t going to be solved by govern-
ment,” he says. “They want to achieve some sort of structural change. Very few of these
billionaire philanthropists engage in ‘Band-aid’ philanthropy.”

In short, they’d rather come up with the silver bullet or the genius invention that will go
down in history rather than, say, feeding hungry people.

“These people don’t want to do stupid philanthropy,” Callahan says. “They want to do
brilliant philanthropy. And they see giving money to address immediate human suffering
as money down the drain. ... These people are so anxious to be super smart and strategic
and make big bets, that they don’t have enough of a big heart.” Editor’s Note: Estimated
net worth information came from the Forbes Real Time Billionaires list on April 22. Data
on the median net worth of a U.S. household, which is $97,300, came from the federal Sur-
vey of Consumer Finances, using 2016 dollars to calculate the billionaires’ giving in terms
equivalent to the net worth of the median American donor.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200608/page/1/textview 6/6
