2020. 6. 18. OFFICER CHARGED; PROTESTS CONTINUE

OFFICER CHARGED; PROTESTS CONTINUE

The Oklahoman « 30 May 2020 - A1 - By Bruce Schreiner and Dylan Lovan The Associated Press

A Minneapolis police officer has been charged with George Floyd's killing as protests
spread across the country

   

LOUISVILLE, Ky. — Looking to defuse anger after gunfire wounded at least seven people at
a protest in Louisville, the mother of a black woman killed by police urged protesters Fri-
day to continue demanding justice but do so “without hurting each other.”

Kentucky Gov. Andy Beshear read the statement from Breonna Taylor's mother hours after
gunshots erupted during protests late Thursday outside City Hall. One person was in criti-
cal condition, Louisville Metro Police said Friday.

Mayor Greg Fischer said police officers fired no shots. Instead, they provided aid to the
wounded, he said. TV video showed terrified protesters fleeing as gunfire erupted.

With more rallies planned, Taylor's mother j oined the chorus of calls for protests to re-
main peaceful. In her statement, Tamika Palmer said her daughter — an emergency medi-
cal technician — devoted her life to others and the “last thing she'd want right now is any
more violence.”

“Pl ease keep s ayi ng her name,” her statement said. “Please keep demanding justice and
accountability, but let's do it the right way without hurting each other. We can and we will
make some real change here. Now is the time. Let's make it happen, but safely.”

On Friday evening, about 100 people flooded a downtown street near City Hall, briefly
blocking traffic and chanting “no justice, no peace.” Protesters carried signs calling for
justice for Breonna Taylor and George Floyd, the black man who died in police custody in
Minneapolis. No police were visible at the time, and officials have said they will let pro-
testers demonstrate as long as there is no violence.

Beshear, speaking on CNN, said Thursday's protest started peacefully but some people
later “turned it into something that it should not have been.”

The Democratic governor also called on President Donald Trump to retract a tweet in
which he threatened to “assume control” in Minneapolis if necessary. The president, re-
acting to the torching of a Minneapolis police station by protesters outraged by the death
of a black man in police custody, warned that “when the looting starts, the shooting
starts.”

“During these times, we can condemn violence while also trying to listen, to understand,
to know that there is deep frustration, rightfully so, in our country,” Beshear said. “That
there has not been enough action on creating equality, of opportunity and in health care.
And in a time of this COVID19 pandemic, it's laid bare all of that.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/20200530/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 18. OFFICER CHARGED; PROTESTS CONTINUE

Bracing for more protests, police said they wouldn't tolerate violence or property destruc-
tion.

“We value the right to free speech and understand this community has a lot to say right
now,” Louisville police Lt. Col. LaVita Chavous said. “We hear you.”

But she added that police were prepared to “take whatever action we must to try to ensure
no one else is injured during this time of unrest. We ask the community to please voice
your opinions in a peaceful way.”

Meanwhile, Louisville’ s mayor said the use of no-knock warrants by police was being sus-
pended, the latest in a series of policy changes and others actions in response to Taylor's
death.

“To the people who gathered downtown last night to protest, and to many more through-
out our city and throughout our country who feel angry, hurt, afraid, frustrated, tired and
sick of story after story of black lives ending at the hands of law enforcement, I hear you,”
Fischer said.

Fischer called for peace, saying the “fight for justice cannot be won with guns and vandal-
ism.”

Two people wounded in the gunfire underwent surgery, while five were in good condition,
he said.

Local Councilwoman Keisha Dorsey termed the protest as “a revolt against a system in
which people have felt oppressed,” the Courier Journal reported. “What I'm seeing is peo-
ple who are trying their best to do something with their hurt, their pain and their frustra-
tion.”

Thursday night's demonstration came as protesters across the country, in cities including
Los Angeles, Denver, New York and Memphis, turned out in alliance with demonstrators
protesting Floyd's death in Minneapolis.

The Louisville protests followed the release of a 911 call Taylor's boyfriend made on March
13, moments after the 26-year-old EMT was shot eight times by narcotics detectives who
knocked down her front door. No drugs were found in the home.

Hundreds of demonstrators marched through downtown Louisville, ending in the early
hours of Friday as rain poured down. Windows were broken and several vehicles were
damaged during the unrest, police said. Shots were fired into government buildings, in-
cluding police headquarters, they said. Bricks were thrown into buildings and graffiti was
splashed in several places, including a firefighter memorial, they said. The police descrip-
tion of the damage made no reference to any looting.

Jordan Basham said she was a few feet from where the people were shot. As people fled in
terror, aman she didn't know pushed her to the ground, told her not to move and used his
own body to shield her, she said Friday.

“T'll never be able to get that picture out of my mind,” she said. “But I am still very glad
that I was there. As long as they're out there protesting, I'll be back.”

The 24-year-old, white bartender said she hopes future protests remain peaceful but
added: “With what I saw last night and with the way people were acting, it really worries
me.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/20200530/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 18. OFFICER CHARGED; PROTESTS CONTINUE

Many protesters wore masks as Kentuckians are strongly urged to follow health guidelines
to contain the coronavirus pandemic. Attention on Taylor's death has intensified since her
family sued the police department this month. The case has attracted national headlines

alongside the shooting of Anmaud Arbery in Georgia in February and the recent death of
Floyd, who pleaded for air as a white police officer knelt on his neck.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/20200530/page/1/textview

3/3
