2020. 6. 17. Stumbles in Ga. fuel fears about Nov. vote

Stumbles in Ga. fuel fears about Nov. vote
Delays and tech issues at polls come as states grapple with coronavirus

The Washington Post : 10 Jun 2020 - A1 - BY AMY GARDNER, MICHELLE YE HEE LEE, HAISTEN WILLIS AND JOHN
M. GLIONNA

Lines snaked out the doors, poll workers struggled with new machines and voters furiously
demanded to know why so much had gone wrong in Georgia’s primaries on Tuesday, a po-
tential preview of how the novel coronavirus pandemic and new voting technology could

affect the presidential election in November.

      

Problems were concentrated in Atlanta and surrounding counties, where voters described
standing in line for hours, with election officials processing paper ballots by hand
painfully slowly because they could not get new touch-screen machines to work or they
had not been delivered in time.

“She didn’t get to vote,” said Elton Harden, whose wife, Rita, had arrived at their polling
place in Gwinnett County before 7 a.m. because she was scheduled for surgery later in the
morning. Instead, they found a precinct with no machines.

“This is a way of discouraging people from voting,” said Harden, who is African American.
“It’s unacceptable. If we’re going through this now, just think what November is going to
be like.”

The chaos in Georgia offered another example of election troubles as states adjust their
procedures in response to the pandemic. The problems could foreshadow significant chal-
lenges in November at a time of deepening partisanship around voting, with President
Trump and his GOP allies inaccurately attacking mail voting as prone to fraud.

The widespread disruptions deepened tensions in Georgia, where a heated 2018 governor’s
race fueled charges of voter suppression. On Tuesday, state GOP leaders and local Demo-
cratic officials alike called for investigations into what went wrong, lobbing partisan accu-
sations

about who was to blame for a lack of training and resources for poll workers.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200610/page/1/textview 115
2020. 6. 17. Stumbles in Ga. fuel fears about Nov. vote

At the Sandtown Park and Gymnasium west of downtown Atlanta, state Rep. Roger Bruce
(D) distributed masks and folding chairs for voters waiting for more than three hours be-
cause of machine delays. Among the voters was Raney Branch, an actress who said she was
appalled by the long wait. Branch said she and many acquaintances requested but never
received absentee ballots, forcing her to appear in person.

“T stayed in line despite a three-hour-and-10-minute wait because my ancestors sacri-
ficed too much for me to be stopped from exercising my right to vote,” said Branch, who is
African American. “The volunteers told us they were not allowed to test the ballot ma-
chines before 7 a.m. How are people supposed to know the machines work if they can’t test
them first? Makes no sense.”

By Tuesday night, judges in 20 counties across the state had granted orders to extend vot-
ing hours at multiple locations — the final voting times noted in red marker on a white
board in the Georgia Secretary of State’s office, according to a photo obtained by The
Washington Post.

A confluence of circumstances hit Georgia voters Tuesday.

Many new poll workers brought on to replace those who had bowed out because of fears of
the virus were unfamiliar with new ballot-marking devices that were deployed statewide
for the first time Tuesday, replacing a paperless electronic voting system that a federal
judge had declared insecure. Even before the pandemic struck, election security experts
had questioned whether officials had enough time to provide adequate training for their
use in the primaries.

In addition, voting rights advocates said there was insufficient preparation for a surge in
mail balloting and the overall shortage of poll workers because of the heath crisis, along
with heightened interest in voting in the aftermath of George Floyd’s death.

The difficulties triggered outrage among voters and alarm about how Georgia would per-
form on Nov. 3, when far greater turnout is expected for the presidential election.

The snarl of voting problems also revived long-standing complaints about the disenfran-
chisement of voters of color in the state, with many residents saying that predominantly
African American communities appeared hardest hit.

Basketball star Lebron James took note of the chaos, tweeting: “Everyone talking about ‘
how do we fix this?’ They say ‘go out and vote?’ What about asking if how we vote is also
structurally racist?”

Former gubernatorial candidate Stacey Abrams on Tuesday faulted Georgia’s Secretary of
State Brad Raffensperger (R) for “inaction, poor planning and horrific execution” of the
election.

Abrams, who lost to Gov. Brian Kemp (R) in 2018, said state and local officials had been
warned that the election would be “disastrous” without enough training and preparation.
She said voting problems occurred statewide, not just in the most populous counties.

“It’s a disaster that was imminently preventable. ... We found ourselves in the mix of both
incompetence and malfeasance,” Abrams said.

For his part, Raffensperger faulted officials in heavily Democratic Fulton and Dekalb coun-
ties for not properly training poll workers on the new type of voting machine.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200610/page/1/textview 2/5
2020. 6. 17. Stumbles in Ga. fuel fears about Nov. vote

“Obviously, the first time a new voting system is used there is going to be a learning curve,
and voting in a pandemic only increased these difficulties,” Raffensperger said in a midday
statement. “But every other county faced these same issues and were significantly better
prepared to respond so that voters had every opportunity to vote.”

Raffensperger said he would open an investigation of what went wrong in Fulton and
Dekalb. In Fulton, many voters requested ballots by mail with plenty of time to spare —
some last month — and still had not received them by Monday. In both counties, poll
workers were undertrained to operate the new equipment, he said.

Local officials, statewide Democrats and voting activists, meanwhile, faulted the secretary
of state for not providing adequate training and resources.

“If there was a failure of leadership, it starts where the buck should stop, at the top,”
Dekalb County chief executive Michael Thurmond said in a statement, calling for an inves-
tigation into the state’s administration of the election.

All five states holding primaries on Tuesday — Georgia, Nevada, North Dakota, South
Carolina and West Virginia — adjusted their procedures to make it easier for voters to cast
ballots by mail. In all five, mail balloting was projected to reach record numbers, with 1.2
million casting ballots early or by mail in Georgia alone.

Voters encountered long lines in several states because of consolidated polling locations,
including Nevada, where some had to wait several hours to cast ballots, and South
Carolina, where some polling places did not open on time and the polling place locator on
the state’s website did not work properly, according to voting rights groups.

In a statement, former vice president Joe Biden’s campaign said the problems need to be
addressed immediately to ensure that all Americans can safely vote in November.
Although Biden has already secured enough delegates to become the Democratic presiden-
tial nominee, a handful of Tuesday’s contests set up competitive congressional races in
November. In Georgia, both parties will choose nominees in the 7th Congressional District,
in the bluetrending Atlanta suburbs, and the deep-red 9th and 14th districts, where
Republican incumbents are retiring.

Georgia’s primary originally was scheduled for March 24 but was delayed twice as a result
of the pandemic.

In and around Atlanta on Tuesday, multiple observers reported that polling places strug-
gling to operate machines ran out of provisional and emergency ballots within the first
hour of voting. The problems also extended into surrounding counties, as well as the Sa-
vannah area and isolated locations elsewhere in the state.

“It’s the wild, wild West,” said Aunna Dennis, executive director of Common Cause Geor-
gia. “I don’t know what to call Georgia right now.”

Ron Clark, an educator and author, said he was sixth in line at a polling location in the
Central Park area of Atlanta, spent more than three hours waiting and ultimately wasn’t
able to cast his ballot because poll workers didn’t know how to use the machines.

Now, Clark said he is worried that his vote won’t count. He cast a provisional ballot, but he
thinks the computer system logged him as having voted even though he wasn’t able to.
When he left, workers were processing about six provisional ballots per hour, he added —
with more than 200 people waiting in line to vote. He also watched dozens of voters give up

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200610/page/1/textview 3/5
2020. 6. 17. Stumbles in Ga. fuel fears about Nov. vote

and walk away, he said.

“Whether you’re a Democrat or a Republican, or whatever party you’re affiliated with, you
should have an opportunity to express your voice,” Clark said. “Right now, I just feel like a
lot of people are doubting the strength and the effectiveness of democracy in our country.”
Deputy Secretary of State Jordan Fuchs said there were problems in not only Fulton and
Dekalb counties, but also Gwinnett County, where some polling locations opened with no
voting equipment on hand.

“They alerted us of this problem this morning,” Fuchs said, adding: “There is nothing the
secretary of state could have done to prevent this. This is the singular failure of poor plan-
ning at the local level.”

Joe Sorenson, a spokesman for Gwinnett County, said that 16 out of 156 polling locations
opened without all of the polling equipment delivered, but he said voters were able to cast
emergency ballots until the machines were in place. He said the equipment should have
been set up over the previous weekend, acknowledging that it was “not normal” for it to be
delivered on Election Day.

Fuchs said her office also received reports of machine errors in both Fulton and Dekalb, but
technicians with the state said both were caused by poll workers. She said the technicians
found that in one instance, poll workers were inserting magnetic voter cards upside down.
She also noted that the new machines got test runs in a limited number of counties last
year — including Gwinnett — with few problems. Minimal problems also emerged during
three weeks of early voting, she said.

The new system requires voters to check in, receive a programmed card from a poll
worker, then insert the card into a touch-screen machine to cast a ballot. The system then
produces a paper record that the voter feeds into an optical scanner.

“This is a training issue at the local level,” she said. “Our office does not have the author-
ity or power to run elections. They had all the information they needed.”

Fulton election officials did not respond to a request for comment.

Atlanta Mayor Keisha Lance Bottoms (D) implored voters not to give up in the face of long
lines.

“If you are in line, PLEASE do not allow your vote to be suppressed,” she tweeted. “PLEASE
stay in line. They should offer you a provisional ballot if the machines are not working.”
Raffensperger said that the state would not begin reporting results until all voting was
complete.

Voters in Georgia and South Carolina had until poll closing time on Tuesday to turn in their
absentee ballots, but the volume could require days to count. Voters in Nevada and South
Carolina, where ballots had to be postmarked by Tuesday, and North Dakota, where they
had to be postmarked by Monday, could wait even longer to see results.

Clark County, Nevada’s largest county and home of Las Vegas, mailed ballots to every reg-
istered voter, a decision that drew criticism after scattered reports of what appeared to be
unattended or discarded ballots outside apartment mailboxes. Republican Party leaders
who are opposing efforts to expand mail voting said the incidents showed the risk of ballot
fraud.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200610/page/1/textview 4/5
2020. 6. 17. Stumbles in Ga. fuel fears about Nov. vote

Wayne Thorley, Nevada’s deputy secretary of state for elections, said about 250,000 bal-
lots were returned statewide as undeliverable, disputing that droves of ballots had been
left unattended. The potential for fraud is low, he said, because the signature on a voter’s
mail ballot must match the one the state has on file.

The shift to mail voting meant there were just three in-person polling locations in Clark
County. At one of them, Paradise Community Center in Las Vegas, a line of 125 voters
waited up to two hours in 80-degree weather, snaking out the gymnasium and onto the
sidewalk.

Less than half of those in line wore masks, and there was no social distancing.

“Yeah, I’ve waited two hours but I’d wait two weeks if I had to,” said Justin Daniel, a 35-
year-old barback. “I want to make sure my vote counts. And the only way is for me to be
here.”

“Whether you’re a Democrat or a Republican, or whatever party you’re affiliated with, you
should have an opportunity to express your voice. Right now, I just feel like a lot of people
are doubting the strength and the effectiveness of democracy in our country.” Ron Clark,
sixth in line at an Atlanta polling place

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200610/page/1/textview 5/5
