2020. 6. 18. Standing up, speaking out

Standing up, speaking out
Former OU star Trae Young delivers unifying message in Norman

The Oklahoman « 2 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Joe Mussatto Staff writer jmussatto@oklanoman.com

RIGHT: Former University of Oklahoma standout and current Atlanta Hawks basketball
player Trae Young, a Norman native, gathers Monday with others protesters as they carry
signs during a protest at Andrews Park in Norman.

mack LIVES

 

NORMAN — Trae Young stepped to the microphone to address an amphitheater dotted
with protesters. Some were his family and friends, but those who weren't recognized the
hometown star even through his black bandana and sunglasses.

Young, admittedly out of his comfort zone, clutched his hands to his chest.

“T' m not used to doing this,” he said. “I'm not very open about what I see, or the things
that go on in this world very often.”

But the Atlanta Hawks All-Star point guard and former Sooner needed to speak.

“Even though I'm 21 years old, I feel that it was necessary,” Young told the crowd. “This is
bigger than me.”

Young, as fellow NBA players have done across the country, was front and center Monday
in a peaceful protest condemning racial injustice. Young's speech — that ended with “no
justice, no peace” — came one week after George Floyd died in police custody in Min-
neapolis.

Unity was the theme of Young's message.

“T know this country is in a messed up place right now,” he said. “For me, I just think it' s
important that we all stick together and we stand up for what's right... It's all of us coming
together and doing this as a collective unit. I feel like justice will be served and changes will
be made if we all come together. This is us doing it. This is the first step.”

Young’ s voice grew steadier as he neared the end of his two-minute speech.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/20200602/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. Standing up, speaking out

“Imagine a kid that's playing in front of thousands of people, but he's still nervous to get
on stage,” said Rayford Young, Trae's dad.

Trae Young largely went

unnoticed before cl i mbing the stage at Andrews Park in downtown Norman. He sat on the
third row of the stone amphitheater benches with his family.

Young held a “Black Lives Matter” sign. And on the back: “God didn't give us this breath
for YOU to take it away!”

Young listened for an hour as rally organizers and Norman leaders spoke.

“Obviously I know I' m gonna get recognized, I know people are going to come up to me,”
Young said after his speech. “But it's not about me... I'm not a celebrity. I'm here to be a
leader. I'm here to be supportive. I'm here to make change.”

Young, whose dad is black and whose mom is white, was heartened by the diverse crowd at
the rally.

“T grew up just like another black kid,” he said. “I knew how I was perceived and looked at
in society. My dad raised me to understand that.”

Young has been home in

Norman ever since NBA teams gave players permission to leave their professional markets.
Caitlyn Young, a strate - gic communications junior at TCU, inspired her brother to speak
Monday afternoon. She' s the more confident activist.

Caitlyn said she brought three cases of racial discrimination against professors last semes-
ter. She's interning with Fort Worth ISD to promote equity in the school system.

Caitlyn and Trae are close enough to have hard conversations with each other. Because her
brother has a national platform, Caitlyn doesn't shy away from being critical of how Trae
uses it.

But she was proud of Trae on Monday. So was Rayford, and dozens more in the Norman
community who are longing for change.

“As a dad, that's awesome for me to see,” Rayford said. “The basketball's one thing, but
that doesn't last forever. Who you are and what you stand for lasts forever.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/20200602/page/1/textview 2/2
