2020. 6. 17. Last jurisdictions in D.C. area eased restrictions.

Last jurisdictions in D.C. area eased restrictions.

Customers have been slow to reappear in hardest hit D.C. suburbs

The Washington Post : 2 Jun 2020: A1 : BY STEVE THOMPSON, OVETTA WIGGINS AND ERIN COX

Montgomery and Prince George’s counties slowly eased out of a coronavirus shutdown on

  

ie et

Small pleasures yielded outsize delight. Teenagers gathered for coffees, shoppers soothed
a retail itch, and people settled into salon and barbershop chairs for haircuts delayed by
months.

“I need this so badly,” Bowie resident Marion Parker said from behind a mask, admiring
her newly cropped gray hair at Distinctive Hair & Grooming for Men in Prince George’s. It
was her first trim since January.

“Oh, it looks great,” she said. Deborah Guynn, the shop’s owner, said her voice mail had
been full of eager customers during the shutdown and she prepared accordingly. She pur-
chased disposable hair capes, hospitalgrade disinfectant to wipe down chairs, and masks
for staff and for clients who didn’t have them.

Her employees had been instructed to take the temperature of anyone who came for a
haircut. Black and blue marks on the floor spaced people six feet apart. Above the sink, a
taped up sign

reminded staff and customers that “Barbers Must Wash Hands Between Clients.”

But business was slow at first. “I don’t know where everyone is,” Guynn said.

Prince George’s and Montgomery, the two most populous counties in Maryland, were hit
harder by the novel coronavirus than other parts of the state, which began their reopen-
ings in May. As of Monday, there were 11,476 reported infections in Montgomery, home to
the largest number of deaths in the state, and 15,353 in Prince George’s, home to the
largest share of cases.

The District and its Northern Virginia suburbs started reopening Friday.

As in other parts of Maryland, and the District and Virginia, social distancing rules and
mask restrictions remain in place in both Montgomery and Prince George’s. Restaurants
may offer outdoor dining only, at half capacity.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200602/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Last jurisdictions in D.C. area eased restrictions.

In downtown Bethesda, a few restaurants and pubs were gearing up for their first sit-down
lunch customers in weeks. But many others showed no signs of life.

“It takes a good two weeks just to get everything up and running,” said John Mcmanus,
owner of the Barking Dog on Elm Street, as he readied his kitchen to begin serving outdoor
diners at 11 a.m.

By noon, there were several restaurants along Woodmont Avenue with tables set out, but
only a few diners taking advantage of them. At Fish Taco, you could order at the counter
and bring it outside to a table, but no one had done so. At Tandoori Nights, staffers had
measured the distance between tables with a tape measure, but no one was sitting at them.
At a table in front of Philz Coffee, three graduating seniors from nearby Bethesda- Chevy
Chase High School laughed and chatted, happy to be together again on a gorgeous sunny
day.

“It feels so surreal,” said 17year-old Nithia Akineza.

Before getting coffee, Akineza and her two friends had dropped off textbooks and picked
up their caps and gowns from school. They had also received goody bags, complete with
“Class of 2020” face masks. It was their first time gathering in person since the shutdown.
“Everybody’s like, ‘How do you feel?’ ” Akineza said. “I’m like, ‘How am I supposed to
feel? I’m graduating on a Zoom call.’ ”

The coronavirus, though slowed, has continued to spread. The District, Maryland and Vir-
ginia reported a total of 1,396 new coronavirus cases on Monday. There were 39 new
deaths reported in the three jurisdictions, bringing the region’s death toll to 4,412.
Virginia reported 17 new deaths, with Fairfax and Loudoun counties each reporting four
new deaths. Maryland had 20 new deaths, with four each in Montgomery and Prince Ge-
orge’s. The District disclosed 56 new coronavirus cases and two new deaths.

D.C. city officials said they would announce criteria for lifting additional restrictions later
in the week. Laquandra Nesbitt, the city’s top public health official, said she was monitor-
ing for a two-week decline in the spread of the virus starting May 29, when the city en-
tered Phase 1 of its reopening plans.

The consecutive nights of mass protests in the city, part of nationwide outrage over the
death of George Floyd in the custody of Minneapolis police, has public health experts con-
cerned about the potential spread of the virus and the possibility of a second wave of infec-
tions.

Although the city excludes cases at confined facilities when calculating the community
spread of the virus, Nesbitt said cases from mass gatherings would not be excluded.

“As we ramp up our contact tracing, we will try as best as we can to link their exposure to
having participated in one of these events, but it could be tricky to do so,” she said. “If
people are going to work, if they are going to dine in at the outdoor restaurants and we doa
complete interview of all the activities that they participated in, we may be able to link
their activity or participation to one of these protests.”

Across the Potomac River from the District, the National Harbor resort in Prince George’s
was largely quiet on Monday. Parking spots were plentiful. Most stores were shuttered,
with new signs announcing new rules allowing curbside pickup. Many restaurants were
preparing for reopening later in the week.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200602/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Last jurisdictions in D.C. area eased restrictions.

Laura Castro was among a few other high school graduates who chose the resort as the
backdrop for her graduation photo. She thought pictures of her blue West Springfield High
gown flapping in the wind against the blue waters of the Potomac would be social media
worthy.

Castro also got something she wasn’t expecting: a sit-down meal at a restaurant, an expe-
rience she hasn’t had since the D.C. region shut down because of the coronavirus.

“We didn’t even know they were open,” said Richard Ponce, who joined Castro and her
mother, Olga Sanchez, on the patio at Mccormick & Schmick’s. “We were just hoping to
find some place that was open.”

‘“‘We saw them cleaning tables, and I thought, ‘Oh my god, let’s go,’ ” said Sanchez, grin-
ning over the chance to share her first meal with Ponce and Castro at a restaurant in
months. She ordered the cobia fish with shrimp.

Sanchez was impressed with the extra care the staff was taking to be careful. “They had
photocopies of the menu, and they threw it away after we used it,” she said.

In Bradley Shopping Center in Bethesda, several people waited outside the barbershop for
haircuts in the morning. The hairstylists inside the shop looked as though they could have
been hazmat workers, wearing face shields and masks.

“It was the first one I could get,” said 77-year-old Tom Newkirk, wearing an N95 mask
ahead of an 11 a.m. appointment.

Newkirk, a lawyer, said he’s been working from home but hopes maybe he’1l be able to get
back to the office soon. He said he’s got that “cabin-fever feeling.”

But he doesn’t plan on outdoor dining at a restaurant any time soon. “I think I’m going to
wait on the restaurant,” he said. “That’s not a top priority.”

Prince George’s and Montgomery were hit harder by the novel coronavirus than other
parts of the state, which began their reopenings in May.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200602/page/1/textview 3/3
