2020. 6. 17. Dallas Cowboys

Dallas Cowboys

Organization makes its fiorst comment since Floyd’s death, protests

The Dallas Morning News - 6 Jun 2020 - 1A - Twitter: @ Davidmooredmn

on George Floyd’s death: ‘We can be better.’

Apolice siren blares in the background. Chants of, “I can’t breathe, I can’t breathe,” grow
louder.

Then, one line after another flashes on the screen as the Cowboys make their first public
comments as an organization since a wave of protests have swept across the nation.

“Our hearts are burning with anger and sadness.

“Racism and hatred have to stop.

“We have to come together to change the system.”

Dallas Cowboys, June 04, 2020.

The twominute video, released on the club’s website early Friday afternoon, is the first ina
series that will run over the next several weeks. The next two are expected to focus on po-
lice and the community.

There will be at least two more after that.

George Floyd’s death at the knee of former Minneapolis police officer Derek Chauvin was
the spark that ignited our country’s current exploration of police brutality and systemic
racism. Players began to contact the Cowboys in the wake of the ugly, Memorial Day
episode to ask what can we say, what can we do?

Their initial call to action actually came nearly two years ago.

Kneeling during the national anthem as a way to protest police brutality and social injus-
tice became an issue for the Cowboys and other NFL players during the 2018 season. Owner
Jerry Jones, while adamant that his players and coaches need to stand for the anthem, also
believes in empowering them to influence positive change in the community if that’s their
desire.

A core group of players — quarterback Dak Prescott, linebacker Sean Lee and defensive end
Tyrone Crawford among them — began to educate themselves on the issues. The players
conducted a series of

meeting with judges, police officers, city attorneys and community leaders. They went on
ride alongs with police.

The club facilitated these sessions. But where the conversations went, and actions taken
going forward, belonged to the players.

Why did it take 11 days for the Cowboys organization to respond publicly to Floyd’s death?
The video the club distributed Friday wasn’t a topdown declaration. It was born from the
players, from discussions they have had with each other and club officials since Memorial
Day about the points they wanted to emphasize once they did speak with a united voice.
Their voice will be heard again in the coming weeks.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200606/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Dallas Cowboys

“Protests create conversations, and it strikes questions that have to be answered,”
Prescott says 40 seconds into the video in footage shot before Floyd’s death.

“How can we respect each other, have compassion for each other and make change and
then become closer as a community?” Lee asks midway through the clip.

Former Dallas police chief David Brown and local judges Dominique Collins and Stephanie
Mitchell speak in the video. The clips came from their sessions with the players.

“Are we having tough discussions?” asks Brown, who is now Chicago’s police superinten-
dent. “Yes. No one likes talking about race.”

And this from Mitchell, the judge for the 291st district court, on racial friction with the po-
lice:

“The distrust is there for a number of reasons, and it’s more than just a stereotype. It’s
been our history.”

Difficult dialogue moves protest toward progress. That’s one of the lines that appears dur-
ing the video.

“If we come together, if we see our neighbors as we see ourselves and we all believe in
helping one another, then social justice is possible,” Prescott says near the end of the clip.
“And it’s not only possible in our communities, it’s possible across our country.”

The Cowboys players have more to say. And do. But their first video ends with these words:
“We can be better.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200606/page/1/textview 2/2
