2020. 6. 17. Spacex docks

Spacex docks

After a historic launch, NASA astronauts Doug Hurley and Bob Behnken
boarded the International Space Station.

The Washington Post - 1 Jun 2020 - A1 - BY CHRISTIAN DAVENPORT AND JACOB BOGAGE christian.daven-
port@washpost.com jacob.bogage@washpost.com Bogage reported from Washington.

CAPE CANAVERAL, FLA. — After blasting off from the Kennedy Space Center here Saturday
afternoon, and then whizzing around the Earth at speeds that eventually hit 17,500 mph,
the Spacex spacecraft carrying two NASA astronauts docked with the International Space
Station Sunday morning, completing the first leg of a historic journey.
TO emer

   

The mission was the first time NASA astronauts had launched from United States soil since
the space shuttle was retired in 2011, and it marked the first time a private company had
flown astronauts to orbit.

It was also a test flight designed to see how the spacecraft, which had never flown humans
before, performed. So far, it seems the answer is very well, but the astronauts still need to
return home safely after their tour on the station ends sometime in the coming months.
NASA astronauts Bob Behnken and Doug Hurley, the pair chosen for the mission because
of their experience and expertise flying new vehicles, reported that the spacecraft was per-
forming well.

“Dragon’s a slick vehicle,” Behnken said.

“We couldn’t be happier about the performance,” Hurley said.

With their trip to the space station completed, the pair can claim victory in an epic game of
capture the flag, taking possession of the American flag that was brought to the station on
the last shuttle flight and was waiting to return to Earth by the first crew to reach the sta-
tion from U. S. soil.

For NASA, the flight was the culmination of a journey that began years ago, when the space
shuttle program ended with no way for the space agency to send people into space. In the
nine years since, NASA paid Russia as much as $90 million a seat to fly its astronauts to the
space station.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200601/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Spacex docks

Ultimately, NASA decided to outsource the job of space launches to the private sector,
awarding contracts to Spacex and Boeing in 2014, worth a combined $6.8 billion. Initially,
Boeing, the industry stalwart that had been NASA’S partner for generations, was consid-
ered the favorite. But its Starliner spacecraft encountered significant problems during a
test mission without crews late last year and had to cut that flight short.

That left Spacex, which also had encountered problems in developing its spacecraft, in the
lead to be first to launch with astronauts on board.

Everything about this first crewed Spacex mission appears to have been picture-perfect,
from its on-time liftoff at 3:22 p.m. Saturday to its rendezvous with the space station at
10:16 a.m. Sunday. The astronauts floated into the space station at 1:22 p.m., 22 hours after
they’d left Florida.

Hurley and Behnken, both of whom are married to fellow astronauts, seemed loose and re-
laxed during the journey, showing off the stuffed animals they had brought with them to
show to their kids. Behnken did a weightless flip for the camera, and they carried on the
tradition of naming their spacecraft, announcing they had dubbed their Dragon capsule
“Endeavour” — the same name as the space shuttle they had both flown aboard.

On Sunday morning, the crew continued another long-standing NASA tradition, choosing
to wake up to music. The crew of Gemini 6 started the tradition in 1965, waking up to
“Hello Dolly” by Jack Jones, according to a history complied by NASA historian Colin Fries.
The use of music as an alarm clock continued during the Apollo program “when astronauts
returning from the Moon were serenaded by their colleagues in mission control with lyrics
from popular songs that seemed appropriate to the occasion,” Fries wrote.

On the final flight of the space shuttle, the crew chose an eclectic mix, including Elton
John’s “Rocket Man,” R.E.M.’S “Man on the Moon” and “Here Comes the Sun” by the
Beatles.

Behnken and Hurley went in a different direction for their wake-up call Sunday. At 4:45
a.m., the controllers on the ground played Black Sabbath’s “Planet Caravan,” a slow, al-
most mystical tune that mixes guitar and bongos and is about “taking a spaceship out to
the stars,” a band member once said.

During a live broadcast from the spacecraft, Hurley said the pair had been able to get some
rest before the wake-up call.

“We ended up sleeping just like we are right now, in our chairs, which was actually a pretty
comfortable night’s sleep,” he said.

By the time they woke up, the spacecraft was already bearing down on the space station,
having performed a series of “burns,” or engine thruster firings, that raised its orbit and
brought them closer to the orbiting laboratory.

The Dragon spacecraft flies autonomously, but the astronauts can take over the controls at
any time, and they did so twice to check how the systems performed. During the broadcast
from the capsule, Hurley noted that they were the first astronauts to control a spacecraft
using a touch screen.

“So we got that going for us,” he said.

Unlike the violent force of liftoff, docking is a delicate and carefully choreographed bit of
orbital ballet, requiring patience and finesse. Inside NASA’S mission control in Houston,

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200601/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Spacex docks

and Spacex’s headquarters outside of Los Angeles, controllers called through a series of
maneuvers that seemed to go off without a hitch, one by one.

And then, at 10:16 a.m., Endeavour’s slow, smooth glide to the station ended with a kiss as
the station flew over China and Mongolia.

“We have docking,” NASA’S Dan Huot said during a broadcast of the event.

It took a few hours for the crews to ensure that the pressure was equalized between the
space station and the Endeavour spacecraft. But then the hatch was opened and after a few
more minutes, the pair floated into the station. Behnken came first, Superman style, smile
beaming, into the arms of fellow astronaut Chris Cassidy, who has been aboard the station
since April.

Hurley came next. And the three astronauts and friends embraced, along with two Russian
cosmonauts, Anatoly Ivanishin and Ivan Vagner.

Speaking during a welcome-aboard ceremony on the station, Hurley said, “It’s great to get
the United States back in the crewed launch business, and we’re just really glad to be on
board this magnificent complex.”

NASA Administrator Jim Bridenstine praised the pair, saying the agency is “so proud of
everything you have done for our country, and in fact to inspire the world.”

The mission, Bridenstine said, foreshadows a sea change in the way NASA will do business
in space. Instead of owning and operating the spacecraft itself, Bridenstine said, the future
of the agency will lie with partnering with the growing commercial space sector, as it has
with Spacex.

“This was an amazing moment,” he said. “And it represents a transition in how we do
spaceflight from the United States of America.”

The launch was initially scheduled for Wednesday but was scrubbed because of weather.
The delay meant Hurley and Behnken missed “Saturday housecleaning day,” Cassidy
joked.

Not to worry, he said, promising to put his new crewmates to work: “We’ll catch up next
weekend.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200601/page/1/textview 3/3
