2020. 6. 17. Also: American Airlines adds flights for summer.

Also: American Airlines adds flights for summer.

Carrier returns vacation destinations to its schedule

The Dallas Morning News - 5 Jun 2020 - 1A - By KYLE ARNOLD Staff Writer kyle.arnold@dallasnews.com Twitter: @kyle-
larnold

American Airlines is bringing back flights to popular summertime destinations that the
carrier intended to leave off its July schedule after seeing an uptick in passengers in the
past few weeks.

 

ag! oF
Ths

          
 

After a punishing March and April, U.S. airlines are beginning to see a glimmer of hope as
passengers cautiously headed back to flying at the end of April.

Fort Worthbased American now says it plans to fly a schedule in July with about 55% as
many domestic flights as it planned before the pandemic. American had trimmed its
schedule by 80% in May and by the end of the month, planes were more than half full, the
company said.

It’s adding more flights from its Texas hub at DFW International Airport to summer desti-
nations such as the Gulf Coast and Florida, and mountain regions in Montana, Utah and
Colorado.

“We're seeing a slow but steady rise in domestic demand. After a careful review of data,
we’ve built a July schedule to match,” Vasu Raja, American’s senior vice president of net-
work strategy, said in a prepared statement “Our July schedule includes the smallest year-
overyear capacity reduction since March. We’ Il continue to look for prudent opportunities
to restore service so our customers can travel whenever and wherever they are ready.”

The busiest days next month will have about 4,000 flights, up from 2,300 in June, Raja told
Bloomberg. That’s equivalent to 40% of capacity a year earlier, compared with 30% in
June.

Airlines have desperately been trying to persuade passengers to fly again since the COVID-
19 pandemic decimated the air travel industry in March. Carriers have touted better clean-
ing, advanced air filtration, required masks for customers and loosened flight change poli-
cies to give more flexibility.

But it wasn’t until the end of May, when states started opening up economies, that air pas-
senger traffic showed meaningful improvement. During the past week, airports have seen
313,000 passengers a day, about 13% as many as they did a year ago, according to the TSA.
It’s an unsustainable figure, but still better than the middle of April, when fewer than a

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200605/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Also: American Airlines adds flights for summer.

100,000 passengers a day were going through airports and traffic was down more than
95%.

American flew about 110,000 passengers a day on average during the week leading up to
Memorial Day and flights were more than half full on average. Flights were only 15% full in
April, the company said, because it was flying more planes and had fewer customers.
“Travel is coming back slowly, but it’s coming back,” American CEO Doug Parker said
Thursday during an interview on CNBC. “There are parts of the world such as the Gulf
Coast where there are things for people to do, like go to beaches.”

Bloomberg contributed to this report.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200605/page/1/textview 2/2
