2020. 6. 16. Conflicts imperil watchdog actions

Conflicts imperil watchdog actions

TRUMP’S OUSTERS RESHAPE OVERSIGHT

The Washington Post : 25 May 2020 - A1 - BY LISAREIN AND TOM HAMBURGER

Many doubt impartiality of new inspectors general
i A io " !

ws

   
  

The political appointee President Trump installed last week to investigate waste, fraud and
abuse at the Transportation Department is the same official in charge of one of the
agency’s key divisions.

That means Howard “Skip” Elliott is now running an office charged with investigating his
own actions.

Elliott serves simultaneously as the Transportation Department’s inspector general and
head of the department’s pipeline and hazardous materials agency, whose mission in-
cludes enforcement of safety regulations on nearly 1 million daily shipments of gas, oil and
other dangerous compounds.

“The idea that an independent IG could simultaneously be part of the political team run-
ning an agency they are supposed to oversee is preposterous,” said Danielle Brian, execu-
tive director of the nonprofit Project on Government Oversight.

Elliott’s appointment was the fifth in two months in which Trump, chafing from oversight
he perceived as criticism, replaced a career investigator with an appointee considered
more loyal to the president. In three of the cases, Trump has installed new leadership
drawn from the senior ranks of the agencies the inspectors general oversee.

For the first time since the system was created in the aftermath

of the Watergate scandal, inspectors general find themselves under systematic attack from
the president, putting independent oversight of federal spending and operations at risk as
over $2 trillion in coronavirus relief spending courses through the government.

Inspectors general, some in acting roles to begin with, have been fired and demoted with
no notice, leaving their staffs in disarray, multiple inspectors general said. Adding to their
alarm, several White House nominees awaiting Senate vetting for permanent roles do not
meet traditional qualifications for the job.

Some say the 40-year era of independent oversight of the executive branch is under threat
more than ever.

“The Trump administration is attempting to make lap dogs out of watchdogs,” said Gor-
don Heddell, a former inspector general appointed to audit the Labor Department — and
later the Defense Department — by President George W. Bush and who continued to serve
in the Obama administration.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200525/page/1/textview 115
2020. 6. 16. Conflicts imperil watchdog actions

The White House did not respond to requests for comment.

Past presidents removed federal watchdogs — but only occasionally. Lately, it’s been an
almost weekly occurrence, leaving the offices that monitor wrongdoing across the govern-
ment wary of who could be the next to go.

Elliott’s dual role at the Transportation Department is brimming with conflicts. Auditors
who now work for him are monitoring the pipeline agency he leads. His boss is Trans-
portation Secretary Elaine Chao — whose department he is supposed to investigate.

Elliott has said he would recuse himself from investigations of the hazardous materials
division, but backers of the independent watchdog system said that would not work.

“How could they receive whistleblower disclosures with a straight face?” Brian said. She
noted that inspectors general have responsibility for protecting whistleblowers.

Trump, who often opts to appoint acting officials for indefinite periods, named Elliott act-
ing inspector general. His sudden appointment on May 17, which pushed aside the career
auditor leading the office on an acting basis, prompted an angry response from Democrats.
“It is an outrageous and obvious conflict of interest,” said House Transportation Commit-
tee Chairman Peter A. Defazio (D- Ore.), who has questioned Elliott’s agency over its re-
cent decision to allow freight trains to transport liquefied natural gas.

Removing Mitch Behm and installing Elliott, who spent decades as an executive with CSX
Railroad before joining the Trump administration, was “an indiscriminate dangerous and
potentially disastrous move,” Defazio said. Elliott will also recuse himself from oversight
of the railroad, officials said.

The watchdog office in fiscal 2018 put the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Admin-
istration on a list of troubled divisions it would monitor.

In announcing an audit of the division’s safety culture last year, an assistant inspector
general noted that in the previous five years, 3,319 U.S. pipeline incidents have caused an
average of 15 fatalities and 62 injuries each year.

Elliott also could find himself having to investigate his boss.

Before his appointment as inspector general, Elliott’s predecessors had been asked by con-
gressional Democrats to investigate whether Chao used her office to provide political ben-
efits to her husband, Senate Majority Leader Mitch Mcconnell (R-KY.), and whether she
had sufficiently divested from international shipping interests controlled by her family. It
is unclear whether those probes will continue.

A Chao spokesman called allegations of favoritism “a politically motivated waste of time
that stemmed from a phony media story.” He said agency ethics officials advised Chao that
the stocks did not create a conflict, but she recused herself from all matters involving the
companies and has since sold her investments.

Elliott, through a spokeswoman, declined to comment.

Expansive view of power

Trump has made no secret of his hostility toward federal watchdogs, a number of whom
were appointed by President Barack Obama. Trump has publicly denounced them for alert-
ing Congress to a whistleblower complaint that triggered his impeachment, reporting
shortcomings in his pandemic response and examining the actions of a loyal Cabinet
member.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200525/page/1/textview 2/5
2020. 6. 16. Conflicts imperil watchdog actions

Among the biggest defenders of his actions is Attorney General William P. Barr, who told
Fox News that the intelligence community watchdog overstepped his authority to report
wrongdoing when he informed Congress of a whistleblower’s complaint about Trump’s
dealings with Ukraine.

Advocates for government oversight in both parties see a dangerous precedent in this ex-
pansive view of presidential power. The watchdogs, overseeing 14,000 auditors and inves-
tigators across the government, have a broad mandate that ranges from routine audits of
operations and spending to investigations of criminal activity.

They are rarely popular with government leaders, who often complain or are embarrassed
by reports calling for corrective action. As Justice Department Inspector General Michael
Horowitz said at a recent American University seminar, the jobs are as comfortable “as
straddling a barbed wire fence.”

Thirty-eight of the 75 current inspector general roles are presidential appointees at large
agencies, with all but one of those, the special inspector general for Afghanistan recovery,
requiring Senate confirmation. The rest are designated by the heads of small agencies. The
appointees have no fixed terms, and many have served for years. They occupy an unusual
place in the bureaucracy: They are not political appointees who come and go with each ad-
ministration, nor are they civil servants with protections from firing by a president an-
gered by their work.

A president can remove a Senate-confirmed watchdog. Congress must get an explanation,
not a legal justification, a loophole that’s rekindled discussion on Capitol Hill of the need
to strengthen the community against the kind of rapid-fire dismissals going on now.
President Ronald Reagan attempted to fire and replace all serving inspectors general when
he assumed office in 1981. But he backed off after bipartisan criticism and allowed many of
the veterans to stay.

Obama dismissed one in his first term and, like Trump, left multiple positions without
permanent replacements during his tenure. The congressional response to Reagan’s and
Obama’s actions was swift and strong, with bipartisan complaints directed at the White
House.

Over the past four decades, inspectors general have built political capital through high-
profile accomplishments, some of which paved the way for reforms and led to discipline of
top officials.

The Navy inspector general began in 2007 to uncover one of the largest contracting and
national security scandals in military history, revealing that Leonard Glenn Francis, a
Malaysian port official known as “Fat Leonard,” provided cash, luxury items and prosti-
tutes to a large number of officers of the U.S. Seventh Fleet. They, in turn, gave him classi-
fied material about ship movements and information about Navy contracting and law en-
forcement investigations.

The resulting Justice Department probe produced 33 indictments, 22 guilty pleas and an
admission by Francis that his company bilked the Navy of $35 million.

After a whistleblower alleged that the CIA was engaged in “war crimes” by using harsh in-
terrogation techniques on suspected terrorists, Inspector General John Helgerson began a
review of a secret program set up after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks to question suspected ter-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200525/page/1/textview 3/5
2020. 6. 16. Conflicts imperil watchdog actions

rorists. His investigation questioned the effectiveness of the CIA’S interrogation tech-
niques. Senate investigators later relied on the disclosures as they probed the use of torture
in a 7,000-page investigation.

“T don’t think you can overstate the importance of aggressive and independent inspector
generals,” said Daniel J. Jones, the lead investigator for the Senate “Torture Report.” His
role in the inquiry was memorialized in last year’s film “The Report.”

The Trump era has brought high-profile targets, too, from multiple Cabinet secretaries
ensnared in travel scandals to Horowitz’s review of applications the FBI made to the For-
eign Intelligence Surveillance Court during its investigation into Russian interference in
the 2016 election.

Among the most significant actions by a watchdog was that of Michael Atkinson, the intel-
ligence community inspector general who alerted Congress to the whistleblower complaint
that led to Trump’s impeachment. Trump, who had appointed Atkinson, fired him in April.
Atkinson was replaced in an acting capacity by Thomas Monheim, who took a leave from
his job as general counsel of the National Geospatial-intelligence Agency, one of the divi-
sions his office is now monitoring for wrongdoing.

Education Secretary Betsy DeVos tried early last year to fire her agency’s acting inspector,
who was scrutinizing her role in promoting for-profit colleges, and install her deputy gen-
eral counsel. The plan was scuttled after an outcry from Democrats.

Firings rattle watchdogs

When asked last week why he fired Steve Linick, the well-regarded State Department in-
spector general, Trump said, “I have the absolute right as president to terminate.” That’s
true. His dismissals have, however, breached a norm of independent scrutiny.

Four days after axing Atkinson, Trump removed the acting Defense Department inspector
general, Glenn Fine, from a new role as chairman of the Pandemic Response Accountability
Committee, created to watch over relief spending.

Three weeks later, Trump pushed aside Christi Grimm as the top watchdog at the Health
and Human Services Department after she released a report disclosing hospitals’ struggles
to obtain basic supplies. Then Trump fired Linick on the recommendation of Secretary of
State Mike Pompeo.

Congressional Democrats say Linick was investigating Pompeo for misuse of department
staff and had been asked to review his efforts to use an emergency declaration to justify
the sale of $8 billion in arms to Saudi Arabia. Pompeo complained to the president and
asked him to remove Linick.

Linick’s replacement also will be in charge of investigating himself, and he has made no
effort at recusal. Stephen Ackard, a political appointee and an ally of Vice President Pence,
is keeping his position as head of the State Department’s Office of Foreign Missions, an-
other conflict decried by congressional Democrats.

The office supports more than 800 U.S. embassies and consular offices, operations that are
routinely audited. A few months before Ackard took over the Office of Foreign Missions last
year, Linick’s staff issued a hard-hitting report citing vacancies and management failures
in the office.

The State Department did not respond to requests for comment.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200525/page/1/textview 4/5
2020. 6. 16. Conflicts imperil watchdog actions

The firings have rattled the community of federal watchdogs, who have pledged to their
staffs that they will not back down on tough investigations. But there is deep anxiety, ac-
cording to four inspectors general who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss
sensitive matters.

The first wave of Trump nominees the Senate confirmed for watchdog roles had traditional
résumés for the job. But recent nominees to high-profile inspector general offices, includ-
ing at the Defense Department, HHS and the CIA, have far less leadership experience. They
lack a deep background in auditing or investigations, raising concerns about whether they
can succeed in roles they may not be prepared for, according to four current watchdogs,
who spoke on the condition of anonymity to talk candidly.

After Trump demoted Fine at the Defense Department, he appointed Sean O’donnell to
lead it on an acting basis. O’donnell, a former Justice Department trial attorney, had served
only four months as the Environmental Protection Agency inspector general when the
White House told him he would be leading both offices.

In the past, inspectors general have received bipartisan support. But most Republicans
have been muted following Trump’s recent actions or joined in the presidential criticism.
Senate Democrats joined House members in calling for limits on a future president’s
power to fire inspectors general. The latest pandemic relief bill passed by the House con-
tains language that would restrict the removal of a watchdog to neglect of duty or malfea-
sance.

“Where are my Republican colleagues?” Senate Minority Leader Charles E. Schumer (D-
N.Y.) asked last week on the floor as he denounced the removals. “They are so afraid of
President Trump, they cling, almost, to his ankles.”

As Schumer spoke, Sen. Charles E. Grassley (R-iowa) released a letter to the president that
asked for an explanation of Linick’s removal. Inspectors general, Grassley wrote, “should
be free from partisan political interference from either the Executive or Legislative
branch.” Sen. Mitt Romney (R-utah) also took issue with the firings, citing “a threat to ac-
countable democracy” in a tweet after Linick’s removal.

But as of last week, no Republicans had joined Democrats in calling for a permanent fix to
give the inspectors general more protection.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200525/page/1/textview 5/5
