2020. 6. 17. Armed civilians: “Antifa” warnings prompt militant scenes in Idaho.

Armed civilians: “Antifa” warnings prompt militant scenes in
Idaho.

The Washington Post : 5 Jun 2020 - A1 - BY ISAAC STANLEY- BECKER AND TONY ROMNM isaac.stanley-becker @wash-
post.com tony.romm@washpost.com

Protesters had only begun assembling peacefully in Idaho when a Facebook page for re-

tired police officers advised its followers to stay on high alert.
I p rr F Fae! ae

    
   

 

“We will protect our neighborhoods,” it vowed.

So when early reports about potential violence surfaced a day later — claiming “ANTIFA
agitators” were storming the state this week — scores of residents took to the streets.
Armed with military-style assault rifles, they stood guard in places such as Coeur d’alene,
a resort town of 50,000 on a lake in northwest Idaho.

“Enough of us swung into action, and put the word out on social media and elsewhere, that
we were able to deploy and meet any violent elements that might come here from out of
state,” said Trevor Treller, a sommelier and one of the armed locals. Treller, 48, said he
mobilized after hearing from trusted voices that “antifa types” were on the move. It would
not prove to be true. As vigils and protest actions unfolded in Idaho this week, local offi-
cials across the state confirmed that not a single participant was known to have defiled a
home or storefront in the name of “antifa,” a loose label attributed to far-left activists.
Many of the rumors about violent protests originated from dubious Facebook posts, often
shared widely and rarely debunked, residents there said.

The raft of myths and misstatements that triggered visceral reactions throughout Idaho il-
lustrates how long-standing grievances have fused with the vast reach of social media
during protests that have swept through the country — in big cities and rural towns — af-
ter the killing of a black man in the custody of Minneapolis police last week. Though many
of the protests have been peaceful pleas to redress racial injustice, scenes of burning build-
ings and trashed businesses — often not at the hands of the demonstrators — have fueled
the perception of a country under siege.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200605/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. Armed civilians: “Antifa” warnings prompt militant scenes in Idaho.

As President Trump militarizes the government’s response to the roiling demonstrations,
armed civilians across the country are taking matters into their own hands. They have en-
gaged in preemptive acts of escalation, often in response to imaginary threats, raising ten-
sions at demonstrations touched off by the death of 46-year-old George Floyd and inten-
sified by the coronavirus pandemic and the resulting economic collapse, which have dis-
proportionately affected black Americans.

Such actions are particularly visible in the Idaho Panhandle and parts of the Treasure Val-
ley, long hotbeds of the anti-government militia movement and magnets for disaffected
whites fleeing more-diverse and increasingly liberal enclaves, experts said. The mobiliza-
tion of counterprotesters, these observers said, offers stark evidence that rising calls for
racial justice are echoing across the country at the very moment that white resentment is
also flaring.

“It’s combustible,” said Todd

Shallat, a historian at Boise State University. “The local acts of vigilantism show how a ris-
ing population of discontented whites is reacting to the increasingly visible claims of mi-
nority groups.”

The demand for racial justice, as well as the reception to it, are especially striking in Idaho,
a state that has fewer than 10,000 black residents, less than 1 percent of the population,
according to census estimates. Just Vermont and Montana have smaller percentages of
black residents.

“There’s so much implicit bias about black people’s criminality that some people assume
there’s going to be violence or infiltration when we gather,” said Whitney Mestelle, a local
activist in Boise who helped organize a peaceful vigil Tuesday. “They may even have good
intentions, but it doesn’t make me feel more comfortable to see people open-carry.”

She added, “Our agenda is peace.”

People wielding everything from bats to firearms have appeared at protests in
Philadelphia, San Antonio and other cities. At times, their presence has led to confronta-
tions with protesters. Sometimes there has been gunfire: In Boise, an 18year-old white
man was arrested after allegedly firing his rifle into the ground during a protest outside
the capitol.

Most of the protests in Idaho have been peaceful, including in places where armed coun-
terprotesters and militia groups have been prominent. Many said they mobilized out of
concern about rioting and looting by antifa, a movement that Trump has blamed for vio-
lence nationwide. Trump’s claims have drawn support from his attorney general,

William P. Barr, who pointed to the role of “anarchistic and farleft extremists” without yet
offering evidence of such involvement.

Varied actors have been accused of exacerbating the unrest — from police officers filmed
brutalizing people who had their hands raised in surrender to a 20-year-old clad in the in-
signia of a militant movement for veganism attacking a police vehicle. Prosecutors in Las
Vegas on Wednesday announced charges against three men in what they said was a right-
wing conspiracy to push protests on the Strip into violence.

But discussion about antifa has reverberated especially widely across Facebook, including
on a page that bills itself as “North Idaho News.” The page acknowl

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200605/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. Armed civilians: “Antifa” warnings prompt militant scenes in Idaho.

edges in fine print that it is “not affiliated with any real news company.” On Monday,
though, it claimed to have “credible information that violent rioters, not just peaceful pro-
testers, have plans to come to Coeur d’alene.” Reached Wednesday via Facebook message,
the unidentified operator of North Idaho News declined to comment.

The post quickly gained widespread attention, troubling the likes of Chris Dawson, a re-
tired police officer from Santa Clarita, Calif., and the president of the ex-law- enforcement
group on Facebook that put its members on high alert. His Facebook page shared the no-
tice, and Dawson said he had been “given information that antifa would be coming in from
Portland or Seattle.” Amplifying their fears was the destruction that marked some demon-
strations in neighboring states.

Soon, armed members of local militia groups began patrolling the streets of cities includ-
ing Coeur d’alene, said David Hagar, a captain in the city’s police department who de-
scribed the gatherings as peaceful. Asked whether antifa-affiliated individuals had tar-
geted the city, Hagar said, “Not that we’ve identified.”

“T think a lot of it was fueled by social media,” Hagar said.

Dawson acknowledged in an interview that there was “no concrete evidence that was going
to occur.” His intention, he said, was to tell his network to “be prepared in case something
goes wrong.”

Similar rumors gripped Payette County, a rural expanse on Idaho’s western edge. One post
shared widely on Facebook said antifa had dispatched a “plane load of people” arriving
from Seattle, targeting Idaho’s rural regions. “The sheriff in Payette has already spotted
some of them,” the notice continued.

Phone calls soon flooded the sheriff ’s office, leaving local law enforcement perplexed.

“It indicated maybe we had given some warning to our citizens, which we hadn’t done,”
said Lt. Andy Creech. The original Facebook post had been shared more than 200 times be-
fore local authorities put out an alert of their own, clarifying: “The information in this
social media post is not accurate.”

Facebook declined to comment on the proliferation of falsehoods in Idaho. But a
spokesman, Andy Stone, said in a statement that the company generally has been “work-
ing to find and remove violating activity since the protests started.”

The false notion continues to have traction with local paramilitary groups, including the
farright Three Percenters, who draw their name from the disputed claim that just 3 percent
of American colonists were fighting at any one time during the revolt against the British
crown. An Idaho branch said in a Facebook post Sunday that it had “credible intel” about
plans for an antifainduced riot in Boise. No such riot took place.

Treller, who left California five years ago for Coeur d’alene, said reports of extremist activ-
ity were “quadruple verified,” including by “those who monitor some of the communica-
tions going on between these groups.” He could not produce the communications.
“Several of them were going to be coming in from out of state, particularly from
Washington and Oregon, in hopes of causing trouble of some indeterminate kind,” he said.
“Possibly rioting, possibly looting, certainly demonstrating, which can lead to those sort
of things if it’s the wrong kind of people demonstrating, like the more radical elements of
Black Lives Matter or left-wing extremists.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200605/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. Armed civilians: “Antifa” warnings prompt militant scenes in Idaho.

The apparent intention, Treller said, was to “strike a symbolic blow against a state that
doesn’t cultivate these sorts of unpleasant and not-very-patriotic movements.”

“The fact that we appeared in such great numbers, and with much more efficient weapons
than they have, could be the reason it did not happen,” he said.

Others decried the show of force. The focus on outside agitators discredits homegrown or-
ganizing, said Lisa Sanchez, a member of the Boise City Council.

“To assert yourself and your right to live in a safe, welcoming environment is threatening
to the point where people feel they need to show up with guns,” Sanchez said.

She noted that armed protesters had appeared last month on the steps of the capitol to de-
mand the reopening of the economy during the pandemic — a mobilization that brought
no similar warning about rioting. In other states, similar demonstrations interfered with
Democratic deliberation. In Michigan, gun-toting protesters gathered at the statehouse
demanding that lawmakers ease pandemic restrictions, prompting the legislative session
to be canceled rather than running the risk of facing an armed insurrection.

Recent protests against police violence in Idaho have not caused similar disruptions.

Tai Simpson, an indigenous activist in Boise, said the Tuesday vigil she and Mestelle had
organized drew a crowd of about 5,000 to the city’s downtown, concluding about 10:30
p.m. “without any interruption from agitators or antifa protesters.” Several altercations
with counterprotesters broke out later in the night, she said.

Misinformation, Simpson said, inflames antagonism against black residents.

“It’s fear tactics,” she said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200605/page/1/textview 4/4
