2020. 6. 17. Europe: Easing restrictions hasn't led to increase in virus cases.

Europe: Easing restrictions hasn’t led to increase in virus
cases.

Experts cite behavioral changes, warm weather, new therapies

The Washington Post - 8 Jun 2020: A1 - BY CHICO HARLAN, LOVEDAY MORRIS, MICHAEL BIRNBAUM AND
STEFANO PITRELLI chico.harlan@washpost.com loveday.morris@washpost.com michael.birmbaum@washpost.com

ROME — When Italy ended its lockdown one month ago, Angelo Pan, an infectious-
disease doctor, was worried. His hospital, at the epicenter of the country’s outbreak,
braced for the possibility that progress against the coronavirus might slow or reverse —
and that beds might again become crowded with people struggling to breathe.

Reported cases Continue to DeChne dung reopening

Courties In Europe have taken difieremd approactes bn recpening, some
stardingwith shoots and others with fm, and somahiad more restrictive
lockdowne than others. But in OOUTiy aflor country, naw daly oasce hays
comtinued 1 cecine ever aftor metrictions wera ified.

 

 

 

Balgism Hotharlonds

Sousa: ionra Hepa ralinkenry POUIINS THEA SH WSTOM POET

But that’s not what has happened.

In Italy and across most of Europe, countries have restarted their economies and resumed
a degree of socializing without visible signs of the dire health consequences forecast by
many. Pan’s northern Italian hospital, rather than seeing an uptick, has been able to re-
store once-paused services and dismantle the intensive- care beds added during the emer-
gency.

As of Friday, it hadn’t admitted a coronavirus intensive-care patient in 12 days.

“Tt’s amazing that [the virus] has not started back,” said Pan, who leads the infectious-
disease unit at the public hospital in Cremona.

Virologists from Milan to Berlin have become much more optimistic about Europe’s ability
to manage the pandemic and say that, at least through the summer, the continent might
have nothing more than localized and hopefully containable hot spots.

Europe’s experience, at least so far, suggests that sending children back to school, reopen-
ing restaurants and even making way for large outdoor protests does not lead to an in-
evitable resurgence of the virus.

But scientists also readily admit there’s much they don’t know about the idiosyncrasies of
this virus. They are still trying to make sense of why it is behaving as it has in Europe and
whether those trends will hold — and what the answers might mean for the rest of the
world.

Many disease experts say enduring behavioral changes, from hand-washing to mask-
wearing, could by themselves be substantially limiting the spread in Europe. They say the

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200608/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. Europe: Easing restrictions hasn't led to increase in virus cases.

continued ban of large-scale events is probably capping the damage wrought by highly
contagious people — the “super-spreaders” who account for much of the transmission.
They also say there’s growing evidence that the virus could be proving seasonal — ebbing
based on the temperature or other climactic conditions. Though warmer weather doesn’t
stop the virus, it can aid in the fight.

Europeans, heeding warnings that the virus is more transmissible indoors, have adapted
their lives accordingly — which is easier to do in warmer months. In Rome, the parks and
alfresco restaurant tables are full; the tables indoors are empty.

In Germany, confined indoor gatherings have led to small outbreaks, while outdoor mass
demonstrations against the lockdown in several cities — some drawing thousands of peo-
ple — have not led to obvious consequences.

“There might be [open-air] transmissions occurring but they are rare,” said Dirk
Brockmann, a professor at Humboldt University in Berlin who models infectious diseases
for Germany’s Robert Koch Institute, the federal agency tasked with disease control.
“When you are in a club and there are hundreds of people dancing and breathing and
yelling in a confined space — that’s a whole different ballgame,” Brockmann said.

One contested theory, aired by two Italian doctors last week, is that the virus has weakened
or become less aggressive. Many health officials have pushed back forcefully against that
claim, saying there is no peer-reviewed evidence of such changes, and that cases every day
are still proving deadly.

Massimo Ciccozzi, head of the molecular epidemiology unit at the Rome-based University
Campus Bio-medico, said his lab would be studying ways the virus may have mutated. But
he said there were other reasons serious pneumonias might be developing less frequently
— among them, the wider use of new therapies. Other experts have raised the possibility
that a younger cohort of people is now being infected.

There is accumulating evidence that the “viral load” is linked to the severity of the infec-
tion, and that outdoor summer transmissions could make for a milder disease.

“It’s like a huge, huge puzzle,” Ciccozzi said. “Every day you find a piece.”

All the while, in country after European country, reported daily case numbers have not just
leveled off, as in parts of the United States, but continued to plummet.

In Italy, the number of coronavirus patients in ICUS has declined from 4,000 at the peak in
early April, to 400; it ticked down every day of May. In Germany, many contact tracing
teams sit idle, without enough new infections to trace. In Belgium, which had been one of
the worst-hit countries, hospitals are clearing out, and doctors don’t report any unusual
spikes in patients reporting flu-like symptoms.

“T was also expecting a scenario where the numbers would have stabilized, maybe a small
rise,” said Steven Van Gucht, a virologist who is the head of the scientific committee that
has been advising Belgian health authorities on their pandemic response. “It would have
been natural. But we don’t see that for the moment.”

Experts warn there is still the danger of a second wave, as happened a century ago, when
wintertime brought an even deadlier return of the 1918 flu pandemic.

Even now, Europe has not fully reopened; international flights and tourism have been
mostly on hold, and some countries have not restarted schools. There is still a debate rag-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200608/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. Europe: Easing restrictions hasn't led to increase in virus cases.

ing about what sort of openings, from kindergartens to theaters, might push things too
far.

Once people start moving around in society again, potentially exposing themselves to the
virus, it can take a week or two before symptoms show up — and a week more before
somebody might need to go to the hospital. Policymakers are getting an initial picture of
how Europe is responding to the reopening efforts, but it is far from complete. And there
are some worrying signs beyond the continent: Countries in the Middle East are seeing a
surge of new cases following a loosening of restrictions.

“Let’s take some more weeks before we claim victory,” said Ilaria Capua, an Italian virolo-
gist at the University of Florida.

Ranieri Guerra, a World Health Organization assistant directorgeneral who is advising the
Italian Health Ministry, said the risk could rise if Europe goes through the summer without
a major spike and people drop their guard and revert to their pre-virus behavior.

“We have achieved a lot, with massive sacrifices,” Guerra said. “But the virus is still circu-
lating.”

France is one of the only European countries that has seen a notable uptick in daily cases
since it began to loosen restrictions. It is not clear what caused the increases. Jean-francois
Delfraissy, the head of France’s National Scientific Council, said Friday that the overall
trend was nonetheless a significant decline in case numbers. “We can reasonably say the
virus is currently under control," he said, speaking to France Inter radio. “The virus is still
circulating, in certain regions in particular . . . but it is circulating slowly.”

Some other countries have seen small but manageable clusters of infections over the past
month. One, in the lightly populated Italian region of Molise, was reportedly linked to a
funeral. Spain has seen several clusters attributed to parties. In Germany, there have been
several outbreaks connected to meatpacking plants and indoor gatherings.

The latest such outbreak, a cluster of 36 infections in the Lower Saxony city of Géttingen,
was said to have stemmed from private family parties during Eid holiday festivities and a
hookah bar that was open in a violation of health guidelines. More than 300 people have
been quarantined.

Another cluster of 44 infections emerged days after a May 24 church service in Bremer-
haven, while a larger outbreak of 200 cases hit a church congregation in Frankfurt. The
church apologized for allowing singing and not requiring face masks.

“This infection chain shows us again how quickly an infection can spread if many people
come together in a small space,” said Frankfurt’s health department head, Stefan Majer.
But these clusters have not been enough to disrupt the overall downward trend. In the lat-
est week, 93 German districts — about a quarter — reported no new infections. As num-
bers remain subdued, some of the country’s top virologists predict that Germany, which is
among the most advanced European countries in contact tracing, may be able to avoid a
second wave altogether.

“There was this warning about the second wave, but we said this is not going to happen for
several reasons,” said Hendrik Streeck, a virologist at Bonn University. “We still have so-
cial distancing and hygiene measures in place, and when we see larger outbreaks, hot
spots, we immediately get in and control the virus.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200608/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. Europe: Easing restrictions hasn't led to increase in virus cases.

Most European countries implemented lockdowns in March, essentially bringing eco-
nomic activity to a halt. Those measures, within several weeks, appeared to cut down on
transmission of the virus in areas where it had been spreading — and acted as a public
alarm bell.

But public health officials, seeing no resurgence since the easing of lockdowns, have begun
to wonder whether some restrictions could have been avoided.

“The fact that we haven’t seen major spikes so far tells us that confinement was only a
part of the strategy to reduce the spread of this virus, and perhaps not the most important
part,” said Camilla Stoltenberg, the director general of the Norwegian Institute of Public
Health, who has helped lead her country’s pandemic response.

In Italy, there has been little second-guessing of a lockdown that was among the most
rigid in the Western world. Health officials say it gave overwhelmed hospitals the swiftest
chance to stabilize. For doctors who attended to the emergency, the hope is that the worst
is over.

“We have come out of a nightmare,” said Vanni Borghi, a doctor in the northern city of
Modena.

There might be a return wave, Borghi said, but if that happens, hospitals will be more pre-
pared.

“We have time to organize ourselves,” he said.

Luisa Beck in Berlin and James Mcauley in Paris contributed to this report.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200608/page/1/textview 4/4
