2020. 6. 17. Council split on defunding police

Council split on defunding police
Most members open to shifting resources; others oppose idea

The Dallas Morning News - 10 Jun 2020 - 1A: By HAYAT NORIMINE Staff Writer hayat.norimine@dallasnews.com

In the past, the Dallas City Council has strongly supported the police department. Nine
months ago it unanimously approved a $517 million police operating budget that beefed up
salaries for midcareer officers.

  

ah is

But as the council tries to address ongoing demonstrations against police violence, more
members say they’re open to “defunding” — or reallocating resources from public safety
into other city services.

Several council members plan to release a memo calling for City Manager T.C. Broadnax to
propose budget options that would take public safety dollars and funnel them into other
resources to “restore trust.” The council will also ask for discussions on the topic to hap-
pen at their meetings. Ten out of 14 council members have supported the memo and plan
to send duplicate letters to the city manager, said coun

cil member Adam Bazaldua.

Options include using the money to provide infrastructure, recreational spaces, libraries
and affordable housing as well as to remedy discriminatory policies.

Calls to reduce the police budget come as the city faces anywhere from a $73 million to
$134 million shortfall next fiscal year because of the coronavirus pandemic. City officials
have said they expect to make significant cuts in every department, including Dallas police.
‘Robust conversation’

Mayor Eric Johnson said in a CNN interview that he believes there should be a “robust con-
versation about the police,” the department’s relationship with communities and its use of
force.

“T don’t believe that we can do without a police force. So if by dismantle we mean not have
the police exist anymore, I do not support that,” Johnson said. “And by defund, I’m not
sure what people mean . ... We need to look at every department, and we need to look at ev-
ery part of our city to determine whether or not we are adequately spending on social ser-
vices and what people need.”

Bazaldua said that while cries to “defund” the police have been misunderstood, it’s clear
to him that residents are urging council members to tackle public safety outside of a tradi-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 0/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Council split on defunding police

tional police force.

But Deputy Mayor Pro Tem Adam Mcgough, who represents northeast Dallas, said Tuesday
he wouldn’t commit to taking resources away if the department will need that money for
increased deescalation training and other policies that would help build trust with com-
munities.

He and council members Cara Mendelsohn, Jennifer Staubach Gates and David Blewett
were the only ones who weren’t included. Gates and Blewett said they weren’t consulted on
the memo, though Gates said she wasn’t in favor of defunding police.

“We're going to have to continue to have a healthy police department addressing crime.
We can’t send social workers out on 911 calls,” Gates said. Rather, she believes social
workers can be embedded within DPD to help address nonviolent or lowlevel crime.

But Blewett said he’s open to the idea of reallocating public safety dollars.

“T do think that we should have a cautious approach and understand where we want to go
before we make commitments, and I don’t think we’ve done that yet,” Blewett said.

Less money for the department doesn’t necessarily mean scaling back the police force,
said council member Lee Kleinman, who represents Far North Dallas and also signed the
memo. He sees several areas where the department could be cut.

Some options include eliminating its mounted patrol, discontinuing the practice of em-
ployee payroll deductions for union dues, and having accredited academic institutions
provide police training instead of handling it inhouse, he said.

“The training and recruitment is the bastion of indoctrination into ‘the Dallas way,’ ”
Kleinman wrote Tuesday. “It starts at the very first point of contact.”

Calls for transparency

Our City, Our Future is a group of activists who last year pushed the city to reallocate fund-
ing from public safety — $874.9 million this fiscal year — into more social services. Police
and fire budgets alone total more than 60% of the city’s current $1.44 billion general fund.
Nora Soto, a cofounder of the group, has urged for $5 million to be taken from the Dallas
Police Department and reinvested in 24hour libraries, a legal defense fund for undocu-
mented immigrants and child care subsidies.

The group has not called to dismantle the department, she said.

Soto criticized council members for approving an additional $588,000 to purchase two
military vehicles for the police with money from the Department of Homeland Security in
April. Next Generation Action Network, a group pushing for more police accountability,
has also demanded that Dallas police eliminate their militarygrade weapons.

Soto said she hopes more council members are receptive to their ideas and more willing to
“fight with us.”

“We want them to be willing to take money from DPD. I think we need them to be more
transparent about what DPD is actually spending their money on,” Soto said. “I think it’s
so easy for them to hide money in that budget.”

Most council members have publicly said they support more deescalation and implicit bias
training, and would be open to having other departments oversee services — such as the
mental healthfocused RIGHT Care program currently run by the police. But they’ve also

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 0/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Council split on defunding police

fallen short of any specifics on what a reduced police budget would look like. It’s up to the
city manager to decide that, they said.

During Friday’s council meeting, a few council members supported the idea of divesting
resources from police in some capacity. But Mendelsohn and Gates both pointed out that
the council nine months ago committed to improving public safety and providing money
to help ramp up its police staffing.

Concerns about crime

Council members in September unanimously passed this fiscal year’s budget with a $5.2
million increase to the Dallas Police and Fire Pension System and salary increases for mid-
career officers.

“T can’t believe the amnesia that this council has,” Mendelsohn said. “We have increasing
crime rates, we have still a whole less officers than we ever did, and we have very real
crime that’s happening. ... And you want to defund the police? I don’t even know what
you’ re talking about.”

The city should not need a larger police force to fight crime, council member Jaime Re-
sendez said. He was skeptical last year of the resources allocated to public safety. This year,
he said, calls for a longerterm approach and investing in correcting systemic injustices.
“As a council person, you want to support your city manager, you want to support your p...
lice chief, because it’s a tough job. That’s kind of how I view the way I voted the first year,”
Resendez said.

“But this is a different year. The circumstances are completely different. When you know
better, you do better.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 0/page/1/textview 3/3
