2020. 6. 17. ‘New lifestyle’: Japan hopes social pressure will forge safe habits.

‘New lifestyle’: Japan hopes social pressure will forge safe
habits.

The Washington Post : 26 May 2020 - A1 - BY SIMON DENYER simon.denyer@washpost.com

TOKYO — Somewhere in this crowded, sprawling city of 37 million people, the coronavirus
is still lurking. But life must go on.

I : 7

   

On Monday, Japan lifted the state of emergency over the greater Tokyo area, effectively
ending the country’s soft lockdown. New infections have slowed to a trickle and hospital
beds have been freed up. There is, finally, light at the end of the tunnel.

Now Japan is getting ready for what it’s calling a “new lifestyle,” an idiosyncratic attempt
to restart daily life without provoking another increase in infections.

It is a uniquely Japanese approach to containing the virus based on request, consensus and
social pressure rather than government edicts and legal sanctions, but it’s one that has had
some success despite initial blunders and botched communication from Prime Minister
Shinzo Abe.

“The Japanese way of dealing with the epidemic has been quite superior,” Abe said on
Monday. “Now, we are going to venture into a new arena. Therefore, we need to create a
new lifestyle from now on. We need to change our way of thinking.”

For reasons that still aren’t entirely clear, Japan has officially recorded only 16,000 infec-
tions and 800 deaths. Although low rates of testing mean many cases were missed, the
country has had a fraction of the numbers seen in the West.

In the past week, the nation of 126 million people added only about 200 new covid-19
cases, and the number of people in hospitals fell below 2,000. Still, the country has one of
the highest death tolls per capita in Asia, outside the Middle East.

Now, more than 100 industries have already drawn up guidelines for how they intend to
reopen while minimizing the risks of spreading the virus.

The rules vary from the eminently sensible — ensuring adequate ventilation, providing
hand sanitizer, wearing face masks, spacing customers apart — to the slightly unusual.
Customers in restaurants, for example, are encouraged to sit side-by-side rather than
face-toface, to refrain from talking as much as possible, and to consider listening to the

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200526/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. ‘New lifestyle’: Japan hopes social pressure will forge safe habits.

background music a little more. A society never inclined to shouting, overt displays of
emotion or constant physical contact might just become a little quieter and more distant.
But also safer.

“Everyone wants to avoid being blamed — that you are the one who became a hotbed of
covid-19,” said Kazuto Suzuki, a political science professor at Hokkaido University. “This
is social pressure among Japanese society, that if you don’t follow the guidelines, and you
are spreading the virus, then you will get sanctions from society.”

First to reopen in Tokyo will be schools, museums and libraries. Bars and restaurants,
which had been asked to close by 8 p.m., will now be allowed to stay open until 10. Movie
theaters will open at a later date, followed eventually by amusement parks, pachinko gam-
bling parlors and manga comic cafes, provided all goes well.

Professional baseball will restart next month, initially without spectators, Abe announced.
“Obviously we can’t eradicate this virus,” Hitoshi Oshitani, head of the government’s in-
fection control team, said in an interview. “We have to live together with this virus for a
certain period of time, probably for some years. So then, we can’t stop all social activities.”
There is currently no plan to reopen gyms and karaoke bars in Tokyo, identified as high-
risk venues, although the karaoke industry has drawn up its own guidelines, which involve
singing with face masks on, disinfecting microphones between users and keeping listeners
at least six feet away from singers.

Oshitani, a virology professor at Tohoku University School of Medicine, says reopening
shops and extending restaurant hours will mean more infections, and he predicts that
controls will have to be tightened again at some point in certain regions.

But he says the medical system and the testing and tracing infrastructure are much better
prepared than they were a few months ago to detect and counter any new surge in cases.
Japan’s initial response to the virus was widely criticized. A business rescue package was
considered poorly targeted and overly bureaucratic, and Abe’s popularity has plunged.
The government was widely viewed as having mishandled infections on the Diamond
Princess cruise ship, and criticized for not expanding testing with any sense of urgency. It
allowed thousands of people to return to the country from Europe and the United States
without being tested in February and March, seeding a massive outbreak in infections.
Confused messaging also contributed to a fateful long weekend in March when crowds
gathered to view cherry blossoms, leading to a surge in infections.

But there were unheralded successes, too. Universal health care allowed Japan to detect
cases early, even in remote rural areas, at a time when the virus appears to have been
spreading undetected in Europe and the United States.

An early realization that the virus usually spreads through clusters — often in closed,
crowded spaces where people come into close contact and engage in conversation — led to
an emphasis on avoiding what the government called the “three C’s” — crowded, closed
spaces and close contact.

Rather than confining everyone to their homes constantly, it meant understanding and
avoiding high-risk situations — a policy that now forms the basis of Japan’s “new life-
style.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200526/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. ‘New lifestyle’: Japan hopes social pressure will forge safe habits.

The messaging began to improve, drilled home by regional governors, who have played a
leading role in the virus response, while the deaths of popular comedian Ken Shimura and
actress Kumiko Okae woke the public to the dangers of the virus.

“The high-profile deaths created a shock wave among Japanese people, and everyone
blamed themselves — that we went out,” Suzuki said. “There was a lesson to learn.”
Gradually, and reluctantly, Japan’s slow-moving corporate sector began to accept the rev-
olutionary idea of working from home, and crowds on commuter trains thinned out. On
sunny days, parks were still fairly busy, but people generally kept a distance from one an-
other.

The question now is whether everyone will react to the end of the state of emergency
calmly and cautiously, or whether they are so tired of being stuck indoors that they will
rush out to have as much fun as possible.

“Tt’s dangerous to have a feeling of complacency after Japan appeared to have prevented
an outbreak on the scale seen in many Western countries,” said Kenji Shibuya, director of
the Institute for Population Health at King’s College in London. “Japan’s medical and test-
ing systems are insufficient to tackle the next large wave.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200526/page/1/textview 3/3
