2020. 6. 17. Former President George W. Bush urges Americans to examine “tragic failures.”

Former President George W. Bush urges Americans to exam-
ine “tragic failures.”

The Dallas Morning News - 3 Jun 2020 - 1A - By TOM BENNING Washington Bureau tbenning@dallasnews.com Twitter:
@tombenning

WASHINGTON — Former President George W. Bush is urging “America to examine our
tragic failures” over racism, saying it “remains a shocking failure that many African
Americans, especially young African American men, are harassed and threatened in their
own country.”

He said Tuesday that he and his wife, Laura, are “anguished by the brutal suffocation of
George Floyd” — the black man who died in Minneapolis after a police officer put a knee
on his neck for nine minutes — and are “disturbed by the injustice and fear that suffocate
our country.”

“This tragedy — in a long series of similar tragedies — raises a long overdue question:
How do we end systemic racism in our society?” Bush said. “The only way to see ourselves
in a true light is to listen to the voices of so many who are hurting and grieving.”

He continued: “Those who set out to silence those voices do not understand the meaning
of America — or how it becomes a better place.”

The former president’s 500word statement made no mention of President Donald Trump,
a fellow Republican. But it was significant that the Texan issued such a statement at all,
given that he has generally sought to avoid the public spotlight since leaving office in
2009.

Bush’s postwhite House reluctance to weigh in on issues of the day has been even more
pronounced since Trump’s election, reflecting the fact that Bush didn’t vote for Trump
and that Trump has been vocal in criticizing important aspects of Bush’s presidency.

The former president admitted Tuesday that he and his wife have “resisted the urge to
speak out” in recent days, though he said that hesitation was for different reasons alto-
gether.

“This is not the time for us to lecture,” he said. “It is time for us to listen. It is time for
America to examine our tragic failures — and as we do, we will also see some of our re-
deeming strengths.”

Bush is not the only former president to address Floyd’s death and the massive protests
that have followed in Dallas, Washington and other cities across the U.S. Former President
Barack Obama, who is black, said last week that “this

shouldn’t be ‘normal’ in 2020 America.”

“It can’t be ‘normal,’ ” Obama said, noting that it’s “tragically, painfully, maddeningly
‘normal’ ” for millions of Americans to be treated differently on the account of race. “If we
want our children to grow up in a nation that lives up to its highest ideals, we can and must
be better.”

In Bush’s statement, he said “America’s greatest challenge has long been to unite people
of very different backgrounds into a single nation of justice and opportunity.”

His own White House tenure also featured racial discord, particularly after Hurricane Kat-
rina devastated New Orleans in 2005. The federal government blundered its response as

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200603/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Former President George W. Bush urges Americans to examine “tragic failures.”

stranded residents begged for help at the Superdome and in other parts of the flooded city.
Bush, addressing the violence that has accompanied some protests, also said “lasting jus-
tice will only come by peaceful means.”

“How do we end systemic racism in our society? The only way to see ourselves in a true
light is to listen to the voices of so many who are hurting and grieving.” George W. Bush

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200603/page/1/textview 2/2
