2020. 6. 17. What's behind Cornyn’s jabs?

What’s behind Cornyn’s jabs?

Feud with West steals votes from frontrunner Hegar as Democratic runoff
nears

The Dallas Morning News - 29 May 2020 - 1A - By GROMER JEFFERS JR. Political Writer gjeffers@dallasnews.com

An escalating feud between Sen. John Cornyn and Democratic rival Royce West raises
questions about the incumbent Republican’s political calculations.

  

ie” al

With Air Force combat veteran MJ Hegar of Round Rock considered by many analysts as the
Democratic frontrunner, why is Cornyn continually attacking West, the longtime state
senator from Dallas?

The answer could provide clues into Cornyn’s views on the Democratic race for Senate, as
well as his preference for a November general election opponent.

It also reveals a fracture in the relationship of West and Cornyn, two longtime Texas lead-
ers who have been fixtures on the Texas political scene. The back and forth could be about
bruised feelings, with Cornyn’s campaign objecting to being called racists and West disap-
pointed at the senator’s tactics.

“Cornyn’s an old dog playing an old

trick,” said Ed Espinoza, executive director of the progressive group Progress Texas. “He’s
baiting Democrats to come to Royce’s defense. He’s trying to pick his opponent in the gen-
eral election, and he doesn’t want to run against MJ Hegar.”

But longtime Democratic strategist Colin Strother said Cornyn’s arrows at West prove he
fears running against the state senator, not Hegar.

“They see him as their chief rival,” Strother said. “They don’t want him to be the nomi-
nee.”

“I’m sure he is afraid of facing a candidate like me in November,” West said Tuesday. “I
have the record and the experience to more than match him, and I can bring together the
diverse coalition of voters he and the Republicans have tried so hard to suppress in Texas,
even now denying the common sense of voting by mail during COVID19, because they value
power more than people’s safety.”

A spokesperson for the Cornyn campaign declined additional comment.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200529/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. What's behind Cornyn’s jabs?

Former Dallas County Republican Party Chairman Jonathan Neerman said it would be eas-
ier for Cornyn to run against West because the Dallas Democrat has a record to poke. He
said that waking up a sleepy electorate was Cornyn’s first concern.

“That they are producing these ads now means that they see it as an opportunity to be ac-
tive during a political lull,” Neerman said. “The senator going after the senator is raising
both of their profiles.”

Hard feelings

Earlier this month, Cornyn infuriated West when his campaign aides began dubbing the
senator “Restful Royce,” which West’s campaign spokesman Vince Leibowitz called “dog
whistle racism” because it dusts up the longtime racial stereotypes of African Americans
being lazy. The West campaign put out a video blasting Cornyn over the label.

Cornyn has called Hegar “Hollywood Hegar” because of her support from some entertain-
ers, but hasn’t pelted her as much as West.

Cornyn campaign spokesperson Krista Piferrer denied the “Restful Royce” tag was a racist
dog whistle, saying “Restful is a pseudonym for ‘quiet,’ ‘calm,’ ‘tranquil’ and ‘leisurely.’
“All words that describe the pathetic campaign that West has been running,” she said,
promising to rebrand West as “Radical Royce.”

On Tuesday, the new attack theme was unveiled in a Cornynproduced video that said West
has refused to speak out against a “liberal mob” that has lambasted President Donald
Trump. That mob, the video says, includes House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, comedian Kathy
Griffin, Rep. Maxine Waters of California and others.

“Radical Royce is surging, thanks to a little help from the media,” a news release an-
nouncing the video stated. “The truth is Radical Royce sat in silence while liberal elites
spewed venom at our values.”

West responded by suggesting Cornyn was “Trump Jr.”

“Cornyn called me the leader of a liberal mob today to raise money,” West said in a pre-
pared statement. “Like I said, if being liberal means I stood up for women’s rights, or
health care for all, or better education, then I’ll take it as a compliment. The truth is, he’s
desperate. He’s pulling out the Trump Junior playbook of misinformation and bullying
tactics. It’s not a good look for a U.S. Senator.”

Noticeably absent from Cornyn’s recent fire is Hegar, who this week defended West.

For her part, Hegar has spent most of her campaign blasting Cornyn and focusing little —
at least publicly — on West.

“Time and time again Sen. Cornyn proves just how out of step he is with real Texas val-
ues,” said Hegar campaign spokesperson Amanda Sherman, calling Cornyn’s attacks
“toxic political BS”. “If he had any integrity left, he would immediately admit that his
comments were the latest in a series of racist missteps and apologize to Senator West.
However, like the endangered career politician he is, Senator Cornyn is playing
transparent political games and spreading more dangerous rhetoric in an effort to save
himself from being defeated by MJ Hegar in November.”

Hegar or West?

Hegar, who’s locked in a July 14 runoff against West, suggested in an April fundraising ap-
peal that Cornyn would get involved in the Democratic Senate primary.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200529/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. What's behind Cornyn’s jabs?

“We can’t get complacent now,” she wrote to supporters. “Sen. Cornyn and his D.C. boss
Mitch Mcconnell are terrified of the campaign we’ve built, and it’s possible they might
even meddle in our runoff to boost our opponent!”

On March 3, Hegar finished first over West in a 12person field. She has a dramatic
fundraising advantage and more campaign resources than West. Her donor base dwarfs
West’s number of contributors.

Hegar is backed by the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee.

A poll by The Dallas Morning News and the University of Texastyler shows Hegar with a
32% to 16% lead over West, though most voters are undecided.

Some analysts say her ability to attract suburban women voters makes her a dangerous
candidate for Cornyn, and that’s why he’s trying to elevate West. The poll found she leads
with white and older voters.

Espinoza, the progressive Democrat, said Trump’s growing unpopularity related to the
mishandling of the coronavirus pandemic has shortened his coattails, leaving Cornyn to
look for other ways to fire up his base. West represents the urban liberal that Republicans
traditionally use to scare conservative voters and raise money.

“He’s got to find an enemy and that enemy is Royce,” Espinoza said.

But Strother said West has more upside than Hegar, and the low turnout runoff and his
broad support gives him an edge. Nearly all of the Democratic leaders in the Texas Legisla-
ture support West. If his supporters inside the party’s establishment turn out voters, he
could win.

Strother said Cornyn is also worried that West will boost down ballot candidates by turning
out African American and, perhaps, Hispanic voters.

“Cornyn assumes he’s going to win,” Strother said. “The concern for him is what happens
down ballot. That’s why Royce West is their nightmare candidate.”

But if the key to Democratic victories in November is mobilizing suburban voters, Hegar
could be the tougher opponent, some analysts say.

Republican consultant Matthew Langston acknowledged that West would be a better
matchup for Cornyn, and that the senior senator is likely raising money over the spat.
“There’s not the gravitas there with West,” Langston said. “He’s a male, longstanding in-
cumbent with a record to attack. If I’m Cornyn, I absolutely want to run against West. Why
not downplay Hegar and meddle in the runoff ?”

Who’s paying attention?

Veteran political consultant Harold Cook said both scenarios have merit, and it’s hard to
know what Cornyn’s campaign is mulling.

“They undoubtedly have seen something in polling that worries them,” he said. “It
doesn’t come out of thin air. And elevating the guy you want to run against by attacking
him has worked in the past.”

“The problem here is that nobody is paying attention,” he said. “With all that is going on,
who’s thinking about a runoff.”

Neerman, the former GOP chairman, said few people are thinking about Cornyn, West or
Hegar.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200529/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. What's behind Cornyn’s jabs?

“When is the runoff?” Neerman joked. “I don’t think anybody is thinking about primaries
or general elections at this point.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200529/page/1/textview 4/4
