2020. 6. 17. Masks, social distancing lacking at roundtable.

Masks, social distancing lacking at roundtable.

Many present at president’s roundtable on race did not follow CDC guide-
lines

The Dallas Morning News - 12 Jun 2020 - 1A - By GROMER JEFFERS JR. Political Writer gjeffers@dallasnews.com Twit-
ter: @gromerjeffers

With little social distancing and very few people wearing masks, President Donald Trump’s
Dallas roundtable bore little evidence that the nation is grappling with a coronavirus pan-
demic.

 

Several hundred people gathered at Gateway Church’s Dallas campus for the event. Many
sat next to each other, though most others were one seat apart. Very few in the crowd were
wearing masks. Most on the 15person panel didn’t appear to be sixfeet apart either, the
distance that the Centers for Disease Control recommends people stay away from one an-
other to stop the spread of the coronavirus. The panel included U.S. Surgeon General
Jerome Adams, who did wear a mask.

Demonstrators that gathered in various places to protest Trump didn’t social distance ei-
ther, but more of them wore masks.

“It probably wasn’t the best effort at social distancing, though they did sit one seat apart,”
said U.S. Rep. Michael Burgess, Rpilot Point, who is a medical doctor. “It’s hard to do when
you have a large group like that. It could be better.”

One person attending the event who said he didn’t want to be identified because the wear-
ing of masks has become part of a cultural war, said he brought a face covering, but put it
away because no one else was wearing one.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 2/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Masks, social distancing lacking at roundtable.

Dallas County Judge Clay Jenkins was less forgiving about the event, blasting organizers
and Trump for not following guidelines to prevent spread of COVID19 outlined by the Cen-
ters for Disease Control and local health officials.

On Thursday Dallas County reported 312 new COVID9 cases and three new deaths.

“It’s disappointing that the president of the United States would engage in that activity,”
said Jenkins, a Democrat.

Then Jenkins tweeted at Trump: “You are literally in charge of the nation’s COVID19 re-
sponse and chance for policing reform yet you come to Dallas ignore our Black law en-
forcement leaders and civil rights activist while violating @Cdcgov guidelines for 6 ft dis-
tance and masking? That’s WEAK!!.”

Texas was one of the first states to start reopening after the shutdowns designed to miti-
gate the spread of COVID19, and some health experts fear another wave of infections could
be starting.

The number of people in Texas hospitals with COVID19 hit record highs this week.

As of Wednesday, 2,153 people are in the hospital with the disease, according to the Texas
Department of State Health Services. The number topped 2,000 for the first time Tuesday
after reaching what was then a record high of 1,935 on Monday.

The state health department told The Dallas Morning News on Wednesday the increase
was due mostly to large metro areas like Houston and Dallas. In the Dallas area, hospital-
izations increased in the last few days, also nearing its highest numbers to date.

In Dallas and other cities, residents eager to get outside and participate in various events,
including protest rallies, have heightened the risk.

Adams did remind the crowd that social distancing and wearing masks is necessary to
stave off COVID19, using public service announcements by Hall of Fame pitcher Nolan
Ryan to make the point.

He also praised Texas for protecting its senior residents.

“Texas has led the way in nursing home testing,” Adams said, giving a shoutout to Texas
Gov. Greg Abbott.

“That is something you all should be tremendously proud,” he said.

Meanwhile U.S. Rep. Colin Allred, a Dallas Democrat who represents the congressional
district that houses Gateway Church, asked officials to do more to keep residents safe.

“T have said for months we need a plan, not a date to reopen safely,” Allred said, warning
of another spike in cases.

“We can get this done if we work together, but we need leadership,” he said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 2/page/1/textview 2/2
