2020. 6. 18. How much was paid in fraudulent claims?

How much was paid in fraudulent claims?

The Oklahoman « 25 May 2020 - A1 - By Nolan Clay Staff writer nclay@oklahoman.com

Oklahoma may have paid out tens in millions of dollars in fraudulent unemployment
claims since the start of the pandemic, records show.

ac

   

A
In a blunt email, the state's chief information officer, Jerry Moore, blames the loss on a
disconnect in culture at the Oklahoma Employment Security Commission, the state agency
responsible for processing claims.

“Fraud is certainly a crime, but I feel it is just as criminal an act to not perform the civic re-
sponsibilities of the services entrusted to us,” Moore wrote in the email Thursday to the
director of another state agency, t he Office of Management and Enterprise Services.

“T do not know how to move forward and help Oklahomans without business process and
leadership change.”

He specifically complained that Robin Roberson, executive director of the Oklahoma Em-
ployment Security Commission, did not accept his guidance .“She continued to not only
not make adjustments, but entrench in current process,” he wrote. “At this point the en-
tire OESC staff is oriented to impede progress.”

Roberson stepped down Friday after learning commissioners were planning to call a spe-
cial meeting to replace her. On Sunday, she called Moore's remarks disheartening and de-
fended her efforts to improve the Oklahoma Employment Security Commission in her few
months there.

“I'm really shocked at what he's saying,” she said.

“T have made so much change since I've been there,” she said “There's so much that we
did in a short amount of time. I can give you example after example.”

She said she got sideways with Moore in part because she refused to fire three of her em-
ployees. She claims Moore and others wanted her to take the action “for optics.”

Moore began helping the Oklahoma Employment Security Commission in early April with a
way to process claims under the Pandemic Unemployment Assistance program, she said.
“As you know, PUA is still not working,” she said of the program created to help the self-
employed and others not eligible for regular out- of-work benefits.

“He's probably under a lot of pressure to get the PUA out and can't. And he's probably just
deflecting that frustration

over to me,” she said.

The five commissioners at the unemployment agency voted 4-1 last week to turn control
of its information techno logy systems to the Office of Management and Enterprise Ser-
vices, which already had been helping. Commissioners voted 3-2 to put OMES in charge of
“business practices” involving claims.

“We need help. We need a lot of help ,” Commissioner Trent Smith said. “And this is not
your fault, Director Roberson. I mean you were thrust into a comp let elyun winnable situ-
ation here. But we've got to get the help we need from OMES.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/20200525/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. How much was paid in fraudulent claims?

The state's chief information officer pushed for a change in leadership more than once.

In writing Thursday about the“disconnect in culture ,” Moore described the attitude of the
Office of Management and Enterprise Services as “we are trying to stop fraud and pay de-
serving Oklahomans.”

He described the attitude of the Oklahoma Employment Security Commission as “wants to
keep doing things the way they used to — and that simply can't meet the current citizen
demand.”

He attached to his complaint earlier emails and responses that he described in some in-
stances as examples of resistance to help and change. In one email May 1, he was told that
he could not ask questions directly of the private company that issues payment cards to the
unemployed.

A few of the attachments reveal to a degree that millions of dollars may have been lost to
fraud.

In a May 3 email about fraud, Moore wrote about discovering more than 80,000 claims had
invalid area codes for phone numbers. He wrote payments were being blocked on those
claims but noted “41,087 of these claims were getting weekly payments totaling
$17,415,044 this week.”

Inane mail May 8, he was critical of an Oklahoma Employment Security Commission offi-
cial for stating “my belief is that the system we have now is working well for fraud.” He
wrote Thursday that the official made the statement only a week after $14 million in fraud
was found.

On Sunday, Roberson acknowledged that the fraud loss in Oklahoma is surely in the mil-
lions of dollars , “just like it is everywhere in all the states.” She also acknowledged “Jerry'
s team” uncovered thousands of fraudulent claims.

Moore also wrote Thursday that Roberson apparently had a plan in April to have“her com-
pany” develop a process to pay Pandemic Unemployment Assistance claims. He wrote he
considered that an ethics violation and she pushed back“but we were able to move for-
ward.”

Roberson said Sunday she considering using a company that she has a 5% interest in “be-
cause I know what they can do, I knew what needed to be done here and I knew we could
get it done quickly.”

“We wouldn't be in this mess” if the state had, she said, adding that she would have “r
ecused” herself.

Gov. Kevin St itt appointed Moore in February to serve as the state's chief information offi-
cer. He reports to Steven Harpe, director of the Office of Management and Enterprise Ser-
vices.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/20200525/page/1/textview 2/2
