2020. 6. 17. Uniting in outrage, grief

Uniting in outrage, grief
Memories of Floyd, calls for change shared at Minneapolis service

The Dallas Morning News - 5 Jun 2020 - 1A - FROM WIRE REPORTS

MINNEAPOLIS — Politicians, civil rights leaders and celebrities joined family members
Thursday to mourn George Floyd in ways rousing and uplifting — and for one long,
poignant interval, silent.

        

= ig ———
—————— ah dill, 7
a ‘5 x

The private memorial for Floyd, whose death after being pinned to the ground by Min-
neapolis police ignited a global cry of outrage and grief, was held in the sanctuary on the
downtown Minneapolis campus of North Central University.

In spirited ebbs and flows, the Rev. Al Sharpton eulogized Floyd while at the same time
calling for social change for black Americans and others who feel oppression in this coun-
try.

“George Floyd’s story has been the story of black folks. Because ever since 401 years ago,
the reason we could never be who we wanted and dreamed to be is you kept your knee on
our neck,” Sharpton said, his voice rising. “It’s time for us to stand up in George’s name
and say, ‘Get your knee off our necks!’ ”

But Sharpton closed his eulogy in a quiet and symbolic way, directing those in attendance
to stand in silence for eight minutes and 46 seconds, the time representing how long an
officer used his knee to pin Floyd by the neck last week as he pleaded “I can’t breathe” un-
til falling motionless.

Speaking in the sanctuary with Floyd’s gold casket before him, Sharpton said: “Go home.
Get your rest, George. You changed the world, George.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200605/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Uniting in outrage, grief

Philonise Floyd, the first of Floyd’s relatives to speak, recalled growing up with his brother
not having much, but being happy playing video games and football and cooking and
dancing with their mother. Those who knew him best called him Perry.

“Everywhere you go, you see people how they cling to him,” the brother said. “They
wanted to be around him. George, he was like a general. He walks outside and everyone
wanted to greet him, wanted to have fun with him. Guys doing drugs and smokers, you
couldn’t tell, because when you spoke with George, you felt like you was the president.”
North Central University President Scott Hagan drew loud applause when he announced
that the Christian school would start a scholarship in Floyd’s name dedicated to inspiring
young black leaders. Hagan challenged other colleges to do the same, to rousing applause.
Second quiet night

Floyd, 46, died May 25 after a white police officer, Derek Chauvin, put his knee on his neck
for several minutes as he lay handcuffed on the pavement, gasping that he couldn’t
breathe. Chauvin has been charged with murder, and he and three other officers could get
up to 40 years in prison.

Across the United States, where protests had been marked by bouts of lawlessness since
last week, relative quiet continued for a second straight night Thursday following a deci-
sion by prosecutors to charge the three other officers at the scene and file a new, more se-
rious count of murder against Chauvin.

The sanctuary where the service was held normally seats 1,000, but because of the
coronavirus outbreak, the capacity was reduced to about 500, and many mourners wore
masks, some with “I can’t breathe” on them.

In attendance were Minnesota Gov. Tim Walz, U.S. Sen. Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota, U.S.
Rep. Ilhan Omar, Minneapolis Mayor Jacob Frey and Police Chief Medaria Arradondo, who
fired the four officers involved in Floyd’s arrest, along with civil rights leaders Martin
Luther King III and the Rev. Jesse Jackson.

Also in attendance were actor Kevin Hart and rappers Master P and Ludacris, along with
several members of the Minnesota Vikings and NBA standout Stephen Jackson, one of
Floyd’s closest friends.

More than a funeral

U.S. Sen. Tina Smith, Dminn., also in attendance, said that while the service in the sanctu-
ary had at times the feel of a funeral, it was clear that it was much more than that.

“There was a shared sense of community in [the sanctuary] and in the street about using
this moment to finally commit to taking action to address these systemic injustices,”
Smith said. “You can feel that solidarity.”

Matt Allen, 29, of St. Paul agreed. “This memorial service is a way to say goodbye and
honor a life, but it also stands as a public marking point to say, ‘Never again,’ ” said Allen,
who was outside the service with a group of volunteers offering first aid and hand sani-
tizer. “It was important to me to be here and engage in that collective voice.”

Maudeline St. Jean and her sons

Luke, 13, and Zachary, 15, came from Burnsville to show support for Floyd’s family and the
struggle. “Things can change. There’s hope that change can come,” said St. Jean, who is
black. Although she wonders, “Will it be slow or fast?”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200605/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Uniting in outrage, grief

Although the boys were wary of coming, because of the violence surrounding many of the
protests, St. Jean reassured them. “You don’t have to be scared or worried. This is about
showing support.”

Outside the mood swung from quiet anticipation before the service began to one of soli-
darity as it ended. Hundreds chanted “Say his name, George Floyd!” and “No justice, no
peace” for several minutes after the 92minute service was over. They held their fists up to-
gether in solidarity. Then the crowd gradually dispersed.

The Minneapolis service is the first of three this week to memorialize Floyd. Another me-
morial is scheduled for Saturday in Raeford, N.C., where Floyd was born. On Tuesday, a fu-
neral will be held in Houston, where he lived much of his life until moving to the Twin
Cities about five years ago. A private burial will follow that service.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200605/page/1/textview 3/3
