2020. 6. 17. Surveillance: Cameras cut both ways for police and protesters.

Surveillance: Cameras cut both ways for police and protest-
ers.

The Washington Post : 4 Jun 2020 - A1 . BY HEATHER KELLY AND RACHEL LERMAN heather.kelly@washpost.com
rachel.lerman@washpost.com

On Saturday night, as protests were still taking place in city streets across the country, the
Dallas Police Department put out a call for help on Twitter. It asked anyone who had video
from the protests showing “illegal activity” to upload it to its anonymous tip app, iwatch
Dallas.

What it got was a different kind of protest, in the form of a flood of videos and images of
K-pop stars performing. The department later tweeted that the app was down because of
technical difficulties.

In the tense and escalating standoffs between law enforcement and protesters that have
now spread to more than 100 cities in the wake of George Floyd’s killing in Minneapolis
police custody, photos and video footage are being collected and wielded by all sides. And
there is no shortage of cameras to pull from. Law enforcement agencies have existing net-
works of surveillance cameras and body cameras worn by officers, as well as face-and ob-
ject-recognition software. Large retail and food chains have similar security systems and
traditionally will share footage with police if it is part of an investigation. Protesters and
journalists shoot their own videos, the latter often on smartphones or small cameras such
as Gopros.

Then there’s the vast unofficial network of personal security cameras, including Amazon’s
Ring and Google’s Nest cameras, that make it easy to record people and gatherings outside
homes or some small businesses. Even Tesla and other vehicles’ cameras can provide
recordings of their surroundings. There’s no need to even watch all the videos — many
work with apps that automatically detect movement or people. Tools such as Ring’s
Neighbors app make it easy for police to ask for footage from people with cameras in spe-
cific areas and easy for people to then share it with law enforcement.

But it was also cameras that helped set off the latest round of protests over police brutality.
Without them, Floyd’s death would not have been captured from multiple angles and
shared so widely.

“The outrage of seeing a murder has created a national conversation, whereas some of the
other police shootings haven’t,” said Andrew Guthrie Ferguson, a law professor at Ameri-
can University and the author of “The Rise of Big Data Policing.”

Cameras have been present at protests for years, but more recently, the technology that al-
lows people to share footage or analyze it has changed significantly. With the growth of
tech companies and their offerings have come increased concerns regarding how and when
people are being watched — as well as how that information may be used by law enforce-
ment and the government. Adding to these concerns is the growing use of facial-recogni-
tion software and other tools powered by artificial intelligence that are used by law en-
forcement to track down information and suspects.

Before Ayo Omolewa attended a protest in the District on Saturday, a friend texted him to
put his phone in airplane mode and not use his GPS so as to avoid being tracked by law en-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200604/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Surveillance: Cameras cut both ways for police and protesters.

forcement. The Maryland-based cloud-security engineer said he stays aware of where
cameras are that could be used to identify him.

He’s less concerned about ever being caught on camera and more worried about the possi-
bility that he could be put in danger by being identified at a protest.

“Surveillance is a really big issue right now, and it really shouldn’t be,” he said.

It’s no longer just a tool of the police. Smartphone camera footage of crowds of protesters
peacefully marching and resisting police officers’ advancements has spread on social me-
dia, bolstering supporters’ cry that most people are gathering nonviolently. Phone cam-
eras also record scenes that become rallying cries for protesters, including the moment
when a police car drove into a crowd of protesters in Brooklyn on Saturday. Some videos
from protests have led to disciplinary actions against officers, including firings.
Live-streaming from smartphones has become a common feature on most social media
platforms, including Facebook, Instagram, Youtube and Twitter’s Periscope, and protest-
ers are able to show what is happening in real time and capture incidents of police brutality
that might have been erased in the past. On Monday night, a group of protesters took
refuge in a stranger’s house in Washington after the city’s curfew, leading to an all-night
standoff with police that was livestreamed and went viral.

“The ability for the public to document what is going on is an important tool for holding
powerful people and institutions accountable, including the police,” said Evan Greer,
deputy director of the digital advocacy group Fight for the Future. “The availability of,
particularly, smartphone cameras has dramatically increased the number of instances that
we see.”

But all those cameras — and the devices they’re attached to — also give law enforcement
more awareness of the location and identity of protesters, offering unique identifiers that
many protesters try to avoid. Videos and photos shared online often carry metadata that
provides device and location information, something Greer says people can avoid sharing
by taking a screen image of a photo and sharing that instead.

Facial-recognition technology is another concern. The tools have become more commonly
used as law enforcement agencies purchase face-detection software, including Amazon’s
Rekognition and Clearview AI. They are typically used to match sometimes low-quality
images of faces grabbed from security cameras, social media or smartphone photos with
vast databases of mug shots or images scraped from the Internet to find a person’s name
and contact information. Civil rights groups and AI researchers have said the systems are
often inaccurate, especially when used to identify women and people of color. A federal
study last year also found a high incidence of bias in the software.

Some protesters have asked that footage showing faces without consent not be widely cir-
culated on social media or by journalists because police have the same access to the videos
as everyone else. Some police departments have tools that scrape sites like Facebook,
Youtube and Twitter for relevant videos. Wearing masks, like the ones recommended to
limit the spread of the novel coronavirus, can make it harder for facial-recognition tools to
identify people but not impossible.

In Chicago, protester Brian Grieshaber and his brother were careful to wear masks — es-
pecially important during the pandemic, he said — and hats, sunglasses and generic

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200604/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Surveillance: Cameras cut both ways for police and protesters.

clothing to avoid being identified.

‘“‘We have been learning tactics from the protests in Hong Kong,” Grieshaber said.

Law enforcement agencies do not regularly disclose how they investigate people, including
whether tools like Rekognition are used.

Amazon did not immediately return a request for comment about Rekognition. (Amazon
chief executive Jeff Bezos owns The Washington Post.) Clearview AI did not immediately
respond to a request for comment.

People and businesses with their own security systems are a coveted part of growing sur-
veillance networks. At least 1,350 law enforcement agencies are on Amazon-owned home
security camera company Ring’s Neighbors app. It lets police see videos Ring camera users
post to the app, as well as put out requests for relevant footage from users in specific areas.
Public safety agencies have access only if a user posts it or shares it, said Ring’s head of
communications, Yassi Shahmiri. “Further, all video requests are facilitated by Ring,
meaning public safety agencies cannot see user names, contact information, video content
or location unless a user voluntarily chooses to share it.”

Separate from the social network apps, governments and law enforcement agencies can
also submit official legal requests directly to companies for information on users. For ex-
ample, a police department might ask Google for video footage from a user’s Nest camera
stored on its servers. Nest accounts allow footage to be stored in Google’s cloud for a set
period of time. The companies all have their own policies to help decide which are ap-
proved.

“Google does not have partnerships with law enforcement regarding the sharing or disclo-
sure of user data, including Nest camera footage,” said Google spokesman Evan Barbour
Grippi. “We have a formal process that we have long followed to appropriately vet requests
for data users store with us.”

Additionally, many police departments have camera registry programs that skip the tech
middlemen. People are asked to tell the city that they have a private security camera,
where they’re located, and how to contact them. The programs are used by police depart-
ments to put out calls for footage to specific people they have on file in areas they’re in-
vestigating.

Gabriel Meyer-lee protested on Saturday in Burlington, Vt. Meyer-lee, a PHD student
studying computer science, said they weren’t overly concerned about the potential use of
facial-recognition software in the small city, but other protesters may worry about it in
other, larger cities. Fellow protesters work to protect identities by scrubbing metadata off
photos or obscuring faces in the photos they share.

Taking note of the multitude of cameras that may be watching at any time has become
more a part of conversation generally, they said. “People haven’t fully adapted to it, but
they are becoming more aware.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200604/page/1/textview 3/3
