2020. 6. 17. RESIDENTS support businesses hit by looters.

RESIDENTS support businesses hit by looters.
Residents support Dallas businesses vandalized in protests

The Dallas Morning News - 1 Jun 2020 - 1A - By NATALY KEOMOUNGKHOUN and JOSEPH HOYT Staff Writers

Wilson Omijie was riding his bike in Deep Ellum on Saturday night when he witnessed crowds

smashing the windows of local businesses and restaurants with bricks and batons.
t } oe

    
   

He’d never seen anything like it before, so he pulled out his phone and recorded what he was seeing.
“You have a lot of people with pentup aggression and energy, and I don’t think they care about what
the protest was for or whatever the cause was for,” Omijie said. “They were just ready to tear some
stuff up.”

Sunday morning along Main Street in Deep Ellum, volunteers measured door

and window frames of businesses that hadn’t been boarded up. Sidewalks were swept with brooms
to clear away broken glass.

But even after the second day of protests and subsequent vandalism in downtown Dallas, some resi-
dents in affected areas were continuing with life as normal around businesses that had been dam-
aged.

In Uptown, residents walked their dogs, went for jogs and visited coffee shops.

Cars slowed down along McKinney Avenue to survey graffiti and vandalism from the night before.
Whole Foods, Fogo de Chao, Gold’s Gym, Flower Child, the One Uptown apartment complex and Ho-
tel Crescent Court all suffered damages to their windows.

Saturday night, a man was severely beaten just a mile away in Victory Park. He was in stable condi-
tion, police said late Saturday.

Terry Black’s Barbecue in Deep Ellum had boarded up its windows, but 15 to 20 people filled the pa-
tio around lunchtime. At Maracas Cocina Mexicana, a banner attached to a piece of plywood adver-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200601/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. RESIDENTS support businesses hit by looters.

tised a margarita special as several people sat inside the restaurant.

Kamilia Boyd, 45, said Sunday that she wasn’t surprised to see that many people were going about
their normal days. The Dallas resident said she was walking around Deep Ellum to survey the dam-
age herself when she noticed that the day felt like any other day.

“T think it’s normal because it doesn’t affect people in the same way,” she said. “I don’t know what
people are supposed to really be doing right now.”

Boyd said she saw looters throughout downtown Saturday night. To her, the meaning of the protests
had been lost in the chaos of the vandalism.

“Protesters are people that actually really try to make a change,” she said. “The looters are people
that are using the opportunity to let out frustration.”

Allgood Cafe, which suffered significant damage to its front windows, was still serving meals
throughout the day Sunday. The restaurant, which took a hit in the October tornado, is also facing
financial pressure from the coronavirus pandemic, even after businesses were given clearance to re-
open.

Omijie and his girlfriend decided to have lunch at the cafe after he witnessed the looting. Written on
one of the cafe’s boards facing Main

Street were the words “Together we will see it through.”

“If it’s government buildings, that’s one thing, but when it’s local small businesses, then who are
you hurting?” Omijie said. “You’re hurting the same people that are suffering.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200601/page/1/textview 2/2
