2020. 6. 17. Indycar series returns

Indycar series returns

Primetime TMS event marks Indycar return, but uncertainty exists

The Dallas Morning News - 6 Jun 2020 - 1A - By JOHN STURBIN Special Contributor

Drivers have several concerns as the Indycar Genesys 300 returns in a primetime event to-
day at Texas Motor Speedway.

   

FORT WORTH — Reigning Genesys 300 champion Josef Newgarden said racing an Indy car
around Texas Motor Speedway is like watching jet planes in a gymnasium.

Wrap your COVID19WEAry brain around that.

“They’re jet fighter planes, in my opinion, on the ground,” said Newgarden, anticipating
Saturday night’s delayed 2020 NTT Indycar Series season opener. “They’re flying around
in close proximity and going to battle.”

It’s a fair assessment, given that Team Penske’s Newgarden is the twotime reigning series
champion. Still, the unique and potentially toxic mix of elements percolating under the
Texas sun prompted 2016 TMS winner Graham Rahal to add, “It’s kind of flying blind for
most of us.”

Indeed, myriad concerns have been voiced by drivers during preevent interviews. Among
them:

@ Racing for the first time with the Aeroscreen, Indycar’s latest safety innovation.

M@ Firestone’s choice of tire compounds for TMS’ highbanked/1.5mile oval.

@ The rookie class of Oliver Askew, Alex Palou and Rinus

Veekay having to compete at TMS with limited practice.

@ Pit crews working in neartripledigit race conditions for the first time since last Septem-
ber.

Onset of the COVID19 virus has kept the openwheel series on hold since March 13.

The 24 drivers entered in the scaleddown, 200lap/300miler will practice, qualify and race
during a one

day program — a TMS first.

To the chagrin of Eddie Gossage, TMS’ president and general manager, the race will be run
without fans in the massive grandstands — a track and series first.

“It is going to be really weird,” said 2004 TMS winner Tony Kanaan, looking to extend his
consecutive streak of race starts to a record 318. “I have no doubt that for me, I don’t think

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200606/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Indycar series returns

it’s going to feel like a race weekend. It’s going to feel like a private test.”

Overall enthusiasm expressed by drivers has been tempered by issues related to the Aero-
screen and Firestone’s tires. The Aeroscreen is a ballistic, canopylike safety innovation on
the cockpit designed to enhance driver protection; it has been mandated for use by all
teams at all tracks this season.

Billed as “America’s Original Nighttime Indycar Race,” the Genesys 300’s green flag at
7:10 p.m. and a reduction of 48 laps means most of the race will be run in daylighttotwi-
light. Questions remain about glare with the Aeroscreen, especially through Turns 3 and 4
during the race’s opening stint.

“T think the bigger question mark that we all have is how the Aeroscreen is going to play a
factor in the heat,” said Alexander Rossi, runnerup to Newgarden last June by 0.8164 sec-
onds.

“Obviously, Texas is a really hot race. It’s already pretty physically demanding. With the
screen it’s going to be quite a bit hotter, so is it going to make that big of a difference or
not? Again, we haven’t really tested so we don’t really know.”

Firestone Racing is supplying more than 1,100 Firehawk race tires, with each team receiv-
ing nine sets of primary rubber.

The pandemic prompted Firestone to temporarily shut down factory production of a new
tire specification planned for TMS. Working from available inventory, the leftside tires
here are raceproven from the 2019 Indianapolis 500 at the 2.5mile Indianapolis Motor
Speedway. The rightside tires were designed and built as alternates for TMS last year and
tested ontrack in August with simulated effects of the Aeroscreen via added weight and in-
creased center of gravity height.

Given those factors, Indycar has implemented a maximum run of 35 laps on each set of
tires, subject to caution flags.

“It’s definitely going to be interesting to see how that plays out,” said Scott Dixon, a five-
time series champion and threetime TMS winner. “The race is really changing from last
year — we ran 65 laps on a stint to this year we’re limited now to 35, halftanks [of fuel] in
the car. It’s going to be a bit crazy in knowing what you should try to do in that short
amount of time. We’ll put a lot of emphasis on pit stops, inlaps. Could create other issues.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200606/page/1/textview 2/2
