2020. 6. 17. New logistics crafted for summer camp

New logistics crafted for summer camp
Area families adjust to programming limits, some increased costs

The Dallas Morning News - 1 Jun 2020 - 1A + By CHARLES SCUDDER and CORBETT SMITH Staff writers

Summer camp operators are scrambling to adopt and adapt to new coronavirus safety pro-
tocols that mean a drastically different camp experience for children, at a much higher
cost.

   
 

Every year, Christine Ladenheim’s 9yearold son, Brandon, has looked forward to summer
camp at the Frisco Athletic Center.

He gets to see his friends, go swimming a few times a week, and take regular field trips to
places like Hawaiian Falls and the Perot Museum of Nature and Science.

Ladenheim normally books the camp, called Kidventure, in February. This year, she sched-
uled seven weeks of the camp for Brandon and his 6yearold sister, Ashley. That’s nearly
$4,000 worth of day camp.

But Kidventure’s owners are facing the same dilemma as many other summer camps in
North Texas.

New Safety protocols — many of them released two weeks ago when Gov. Greg Abbott an-
nounced summer camps could reopen as of May 31 — mean a drastically different camp
experience for chil

dren, at a much higher operating cost.

And without much of a leadup between Abbott’s announcement and the new start date,
camp operators are scrambling to get prepared to adhere to state and public health guide-
lines.

To close entirely could mean a serious financial hit for camps, putting many parents who
rely on them for child care during the summer in a bind.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200601/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. New logistics crafted for summer camp

A recent survey from educational nonprofit Big Thought found that only 17% of Dallasarea
parents had ruled out placing their children in a camp or child care setting this summer.
“The need for families is clearly there,” said Big Thought president and CEO Byron San-
ders.

A reimagined experience

For Laura Seymour, camp director at the Aaron Family Jewish Community Center of Dallas
for the last 42 years, planning for summer camp is a yearround process.

So Seymoutr’s team kept working over the last two months of school and after school clo-
sures with the hope that at some point, camps would be allowed to take place.

“If we get the goahead, we need to be ready to go” was the mantra, Seymour said.

Even with that level of preparation, Seymour and Dallas JCC CEO Artie Allen decided to
cancel the first of its threeweek sessions, originally scheduled for June 826.

“We needed to have a little more time ... just to be prudent,” Allen said.

In order to meet guidelines from the state and recommendations from the Centers for Dis-
ease Control and Prevention and the American Camp Association — from which the JCC’S
camp receives accreditation — the whole camp experience needed to be reimagined, Sey-
mour and Allen said.

Instead of having communal events like singalongs and theater productions, campers will
now stick with a smaller “pod” of 10 people, including a camp counselor, for a threeweek
period. These smaller groups will do many typical camp activities, but sequestered to-
gether.

The main portion of the JCC’S North Dallas campus will be cordoned off. “We're literally
building walls to keep things separate,” Seymour said. That means the facility’s senior liv-
ing programs won’t happen while camp is in operation.

Staff must be trained differently to handle the new reality, and cleaning crews will need
more workers.

“It’s dealing with everything from ‘How do you manage going to the bathroom with your
‘family’?’ to ‘How do you do lunch time?’ ” Seymour said.

Having to solve these types of logistical puzzles in a short period is a major hurdle, said
Sanders, the Big Thought CEO.

“Two weeks ago, a lot of these people weren’t allowed to do anything unless they were a li-
censed child care facility serving essential workers,” Sanders said. “Things changed very
abruptly, with new rules and information. And that’s not as simple as just unlocking your
doors.”

From the 100plus camp providers that Big Thought works with on a yearly basis, a handful
of difficult and distinct issues came up with regularity, Sanders said:

@ How to staff to meet CDC recommendations of one employee for every 8 to 10 children.
@ Finding the recommended square footage for each child to maintain social distancing.

@ Buying personal protective equipment for staff and children.

i Developing new programming that will work in smaller groups.

@ Hiring enough qualified employees, many of whom might have taken other jobs before
Abbott’s announcement.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200601/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. New logistics crafted for summer camp

Nearly all of the challenges impact the bottom line, both for nonprofit and forprofit
providers, he said.

Mike Mcdonald, president of Kidventure, said his camps have changed but are still hap-
pening. Pools are closed at many locations, and field trips have been canceled. Still, he
said, he can’t refund the deposits many parents paid before the coronavirus crisis.

“My margins have dwindled to just about nothing,” he said. “If I had to give my deposits
back, I would be closing my doors after 26 years.”

For Ladenheim, that’s $700 she can’t get back.

She and her husband both work full time, and they need some kind of daytime child care
during the summer. But she said she’s not comfortable sending her kids to the Frisco Ath-
letic Center for the newly redesigned camp.

“It’s a gym facility. It’s not safe,” Ladenheim said. “This is a lot of money for camp. What
am I paying for?”

Overnight camps canceled

While day camps have pivoted to find new programming for kids, many overnight camps
have been canceled entirely. Many providers that offer both kinds of camps have focused
on their day programs, putting in new policies and planning new activities that are safe.
Overnight camps are so much more complicated, providers say, that abiding by local, state
and national guidelines is difficult. The must maintain social distancing in a cabin with
bunk beds, for example, or find time to clean and disinfect camper spaces while taking care
of children 24 hours a day.

“None of us imagined that we’d see a summer without an overnight camp,” said Holly
Martin, executive director at the YMCA’S M in Fort Worth. “It’s hard to know what the
confidence level of parents would be to have their kids stay at an overnight program.”
Martin said Camp Carter is still offering day camp, starting Monday. They’! have the nor-
mal camp activities like canoeing, archery, swimming and horseback riding. That means
they’ve been inundated with calls from parents wanting a break from the long, quaran-
tined spring.

“Our phones and emails have been blowing up,” said Holli Winn, who runs day camps with
the Fort Worth YMCA. “All I’ve heard is ‘What are y’all doing, and when can we sign up?” ”
Other camps have been slower to finalize summer plans. At Camp Fire, a nonprofit
overnight camp in Granbury, staff was caught off guard by Abbott’s May 18 announcement.
Since then, they’ve been trying to make decisions on if and how day camps could continue.
“To meet all the regulations, we would’ve had to offer a very different product than we
have in the past,” said Brian Miller, who works with the overnight camps at Camp Fire.
Cathy Halliday, Camp Fire’s vice president for youth development, said the staff hopes to
provide an enriching experience for children, even if it means altering programming to
comply with state and federal regulations.

“This is not going to be a ‘summer as usual,’ and it may take all of us, even the day camp
staff, a few days — or weeks — to get the new rhythm worked out,” Halliday said. “Even if
it doesn’t look the same way as last year, that doesn’t negate the value or importance of
day camp.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200601/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. New logistics crafted for summer camp

Right now, the two remaining camps at the JCC are at about half capacity. Allen said the
loss of revenue from the camps — one of the JCC’S core businesses — will paint a “much
different financial picture” in the coming year.

“But we’ ll manage,” he said. The key, Seymour and Allen stressed, is for parents and fam-
ilies to get comfortable with the idea of summer camp at some point in the future.

“We're telling parents, ‘We want you, but you must make the decision with the best infor-
mation available,’ ” Seymour said.

What can’t be lost is the camp experience, they said, which provides children their own
space for social and emotional growth, as well as a sense of belonging.

“I’ve always said children gain more in the nine weeks in camp than they gain over nine
months in school,” Seymour said. “They need that.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200601/page/1/textview 4/4
