2020. 6. 18. SLOW PROCESS

SLOW PROCESS

Columnist Charlotte Lankard describes recovering from COVID-19

The Oklahoman : 26 May 2020 - A1 - Charlotte Lankard Charlotte Lankard is a licensed marriage and family therapist in
private practice. Contact her at clankard@cox.net.

Here I go — again. 40 years ago I suffered a pelvic fracture, crushed heel and broken ribs
and vertebrae from a fall of an estimated 60 feet. 20 years later, Dr. James Odor fused the
lower part of my back. Now on June 1, 20 years later, we're fusing four vertebrae higher in
the middle of my back.

 

When I look back 20 years, what I remember is the first time I stood on my feet after
surgery, the pain was gone. I have been forever grateful and now I am assuming that will
happen again. No big deal, right?

Out of curiosity, I went back 20 years to 2001 to see what I had written about the weeks that
followed that surgery at that time.

I was surprised that I'd forgotten the recovery period. I chafed against the healing that
seemed too slow, the pain that required medication, instructions not to bend, stoop, reach
or twist. The times I felt fragile, impatient, tired. The times I cried when I felt vulnerable.
Ah, I am forewarned and will not be surprised if that happens again, but I also wrote about
the surgeon, the medical staff and the physical therapists that took such good care of me,
the family and friends that assured me of prayers on my behalf, sent flowers, did laundry,
cooked meals, did household chores, provided “care packages,” wrote notes, called to chat
and came to visit.

There was a friend that brought The Oklahoman to my bedside every morning at 5:30 be-
fore going to work and the friends with whom I could cry and were generous with hugs.
Recovery from any kind of painful experience takes time. Even though it is tedious, frus-
trating, limiting and feels as if it will last forever, it is necessary — necessary for proper
healing and necessary for remembering what is really important in life.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/20200526/page/1/textview 4/1
