2020. 6. 17. In line at the polls, some D.C. primary voters said they did not receive a mail-in ballot.

In line at the polls, some D.C. primary voters said they did not
receive a mail-in ballot.

Results not in after process complicated by coronavirus and protest-related
curfew

The Washington Post - 3 Jun 2020 - A1 - BY JULIE ZAUZMER AND FENIT NIRAPPIL

D.C. voters braved waits longer than four hours to cast ballots in a city primary election
upended by coronavirus and demonstrations against police violence.

 

The District attempted to shift to a mostly by-mail election to reduce the risk of spreading
the virus. But many voters never received the absentee ballots they requested and the city
shuttered most of its usual polling places, resulting in lines stretching for blocks.

Results of the election were not available hours after polls closed at 8 p.m., to allow for the
voters still waiting in line to cast their ballots. Initial results were not expected until early
Wednesday.

A7 p.m. curfew the mayor imposed as protests continued to sweep the city halted public
transportation and forced some voters to come up with alternative travel plans, and caused
confusion when an officer improperly told voters lined up at a Georgetown-area polling
place to go home.

But residents said they were determined to exercise their voting rights in pivotal local
council races and the presidential primary, with some citing the demonstrations against
the police killing of George Floyd as inspiration.

“It’s very important to us to vote, because it’s really hard times we’re going through,” said
Claudina Harrison, a teacher who was the third-to-last person in line at Malcolm X Oppor-
tunity Center in Ward 8 after 9 p.m. “Voting is the safest way to

get our voices out and say our voices matter, our votes matter, our lives matter. ... Every-
one out here, that really inspires us to stay a lot longer than they normally would.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200603/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. In line at the polls, some D.C. primary voters said they did not receive a mail-in ballot.

Poet Taylor, a radio host, handed out water and snacks to neighbors who had been waiting
in line at the center since 3 p.m. Then she got in line herself at 6:30. At 9 p.m., she re-
mained toward the back.

“You know they thought people wouldn’t show up. They know how many people live east
of the river. Why are we standing outside in the dark?” said Taylor.

“People say they care; it sounds good. This is not caring,” she added.

Michael Bennett, the chairman of the D.C. Board of Elections, acknowledged the election
did not go smoothly because the agency’s technology was not able to handle the surge of
absentee ballot requests, and because voting on Election Day was higher than officials
thought it would be.

“The good news is I’m really, really glad we had so many people interested and willing to
vote,” Bennett said. “The bad news is everyone decided to vote on the last day that vote
centers are open and they decided to do it in person, and that just created an incredible
logjam when you consider the fact we are in the middle of a pandemic.”

He also said the election systems struggled to manage more than 90,000 absentee ballot
requests — compared to the usual 6,000.

The Democratic primary is tantamount to the general election in deep-blue Washington
and will shape the ideological tilt of an increasingly liberal D.C. Council.

In one of the most closely watched races on the ballot, it was unclear whether Jack Evans
would be able to advance to try to reclaim the Ward 2 D.C. Council seat he gave up in Jan-
uary amid scandal.

Evans faced seven competitors in his quest to return to the office he held for nearly three
decades representing Georgetown; Foggy Bottom, Logan and Dupont circles; and down-
town.

Voters in Ward 2 will cast ballots again this month in the special election for the remainder
of Evans’s term through January. Evans is not running in that special election, meaning
someone could temporarily hold the office for six months.

Council members Brandon T. Todd (D-ward 4), Vincent C. Gray (D-ward 7), and Trayon
White Sr. (D-ward 8) also were up for reelection.

Multiple candidates also are running in the general election for a seat vacated by David
Grosso (I-AT Large), one of the furthestleft legislators.

D.C. Del. Eleanor Holmes Norton (D) and Robert C. White Jr. (D-AT Large) were uncon-
tested on the primary ballot and automatically secured the Democratic nominations for the
general election.

About a third of voters interviewed by The Washington Post on Tuesday said they were
voting in person because their absentee ballots did not arrive.

Board of Elections spokeswoman Rachel Coll said the city decided Monday to allow voting
by email for those who had tried and failed to get absentee ballots.

“Tt’s something we’ve used as an option and we’ve had in reserve,” she said.

To diminish the chance of spreading the novel coronavirus, the city opened only 20 voting
centers Tuesday, rather than the usual polling place in each of 143 precincts.

Coll said that each center admitted only 10 people at a time to allow for social distancing, a
restriction that contributed to the long lines outside.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200603/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. In line at the polls, some D.C. primary voters said they did not receive a mail-in ballot.

Mayor Muriel E. Bowser (D) exempted those voting from the curfew she imposed in re-
sponse to unrest related to demonstrations, despite criticism from some lawmakers and
advocates that confusion surrounding the curfew could depress turnout.

Kevin Donahue, the deputy mayor overseeing public safety, tweeted Tuesday night that the
city was reminding police commanders that voting is exempt from the curfew, after people
tweeted about an officer warning people waiting in line at the Hardy Middle School polling
place after the curfew began to go home. He said officers were notified of the curfew ex-
emption on Sunday.

Voter turnout has been declining in local elections. The 2018 mayoral primary had the low-
est turnout in two decades, with all incumbents comfortably reelected.

More than 92,000 voters requested absentee ballots, almost as many as voted both in per-
son and by mail in the 2016 primary election.

As of Sunday, 37,000 of those ballots had been completed and mailed back, Coll said. At
least 13,000 cast in-person ballots as of Tuesday evening.

The city will count mailed ballots that are postmarked by Tuesday through June 12, mean-
ing close races may not be called for more than a week.

Reached after polls closed, Evans — who declared just 10 days after his resignation that he
would campaign to return to his Ward 2 seat — said it was the first election since his initial
1991 campaign that he didn’t enter Election Day confident in a victory or a loss.

Voter Sam Bunch, 28, a hotel events director who is out of work because of the coronavirus
pandemic, read up on all eight candidates. “I haven’t much else better to do, so I did a lot
of research,” he said.

He came away very enthusiastic about his chosen candidate, Brooke Pinto. “She’s a badass
lawyer chick that wants to get the job done,” he said. “She’s not insanely liberal. She’s not
insanely leftist or rightist.”

Denise Martin, 37, a Nordstrom saleswoman, said she chose Patrick Kennedy because of
his statements about the need for more affordable housing in the District.

“My issue in this ward in particular is affordable housing. It’s high as heck to live down
here,” Martin said.

Up until the morning before she voted, Donna Douglas, 49, was all in for Jordan Grossman,
who has run as the most liberal candidate in the race.

“He had me all the way up until I opened my mailbox yesterday,” she said. When she sawa
flier from Grossman boasting that he had been endorsed by Sen. Amy Klobuchar (D-
minn.), “that ended that right there,” she said, adding she felt Klobuchar did not take a
strong-enough stance against police brutality when she was a Minneapolis prosecutor.

If Grossman is proud to be associated with the senator, she decided, she wouldn’t vote for
him.

“1’m going back to, unfortunately, Jack. Even though he’s corrupt, he can hold his own,”
she said.

Voter Pete Spartin, who works in financial services, felt similarly.

“Despite my reservations with Jack, he was the best person for the job,” he said.

In Ward 4, council member Brandon T. Todd, one of the mayor’s closest allies, faced Ja-
neese Lewis George, a more liberal candidate who had received prominent endorsements.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200603/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. In line at the polls, some D.C. primary voters said they did not receive a mail-in ballot.

Outside a polling place Tuesday, the mayor campaigned for Todd, who succeeded her as
Ward 4 council member after working in her office and on her campaign.

Some of the residents who voted early at the Emery Heights Community Center said they
have been satisfied with Todd.

“Brandon Todd has been very good and very helpful, especially to the seniors. He looks out
for them. He’ll have his office call and check on us,” said retiree E. Wright, 75.

And Tyler Edge, 25, said he thinks Todd has been effective in improving safety and schools
in the ward. But on Election Day, he said he felt George would better understand his fears
as a young black man.

“After everything that’s happening, they said the only thing we can really do is vote. I de-
cided to take this very seriously,” he said after casting his ballot Tuesday morning. “I’m
definitely scared to come outside today, with the curfew. It’s a very traumatizing experi-
ence. I just need hope. I need someone to give me hope right now.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200603/page/1/textview 4/4
