2020. 6. 17. New York, once the epicenter of the outbreak that has claimed nearly 100,000 lives in the U.S., will reopen several more counties.

New York, once the epicenter of the outbreak that has claimed
nearly 100,000 lives in the U.S., will reopen several more
counties.

Wall Street, New York perk up even as U.S. nears 100,00 deaths

The Dallas Morning News - 27 May 2020 - 1A - FROM WIRE REPORTS

Optimism was on the rise Tuesday regarding the coronavirus outbreak even as the nation’s
COVID19 death toll closed in on 100,000, a number President Donald Trump once predicted
the country would never see.

Stocks surged Tuesday on Wall Street to their highest levels since the business shutdowns
took hold in the U.S. over two months ago, and New York, once the U.S. epicenter of the
outbreak, will reopen several more counties as officials turn more of their attention to ad-
dressing the economic fallout of social distancing measures.

Gov. Andrew Cuomo on Tuesday rang the opening bell at the New York Stock Exchange,
which had been closed since March 23, and announced that the MidHudson region north of
New York City had started reopening and that Long Island would follow on Wednesday.
New York City will remain under restrictions meant to reduce infections and deaths from
COVID19, the disease caused by the novel coronavirus.

“We're going to turn the page on COVID19, and we’re going to start focusing on reopen-
ing,” Cuomo said at his Tuesday morning news briefing.

The stock exchange reopened with new social distancing guidelines. There are fewer
traders on the floor and new clear plastic barriers. Employees must wear masks and have
their temperature checked as they enter the building, and they have been encouraged not
to take public transportation.

The stock market rallied Tuesday, with the S&P 500 reaching its highest level in 2 1/42
months. The Dow Jones Industrial Average rose more than 660 points.

New York reported 73 new COVID19 deaths on Monday, the lowest number in two months.
More than 29,300 people in the state have died of COVID19 since March, according to Johns
Hopkins University.

“In this absurd new reality, that is good news, “he said.

In the U.S., the virus has infected more than 1.6 million and has almost killed 100,000 ina
span of less than four months.

Trump several months ago likened the coronavirus to the flu and dismissed worries it
could lead to so many deaths. The administration’s leading scientists have warned that as
many as 240,000 could perish from the virus.

Trump has asserted the numbers would be worse without his leadership, even though it is
well beyond what he told people to expect even as his public health authorities started
bracing the country in early April for at least 100,000 deaths.

On Tuesday, he tweeted to “all the political hacks out there” that without his leadership
the lives lost would be far worse than the “100,000 plus that looks like will be the num-
ber.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200527/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. New York, once the epicenter of the outbreak that has claimed nearly 100,000 lives in the U.S., will reopen several more counties.

‘False narratives’

In Washington on Tuesday, Sen. Marco Rubio, the new Republican chairman of the Senate
Intelligence Committee, warned that foreign actors will seek to amplify conspiracy theo-
ries about the coronavirus and find new ways to interfere in the 2020 presidential election.
The Florida Republican said in an interview with The Associated Press that one possibility
could be an effort to convince people that a new vaccine against the virus, once created,
would be more harmful than helpful.

“T think the COVID19 crisis is one in which you’ve seen efforts to promote false narratives
that drive some of the friction in this country,” Rubio said.

Four years after Russian efforts to sow division in the U.S., he warned: “I’m not sure that
we’re any less vulnerable than we once were.”

Now privy to the highestlevel classified briefings as chairman, Rubio says he can’t talk
about specific influence operations because “obviously some of that is ongoing.” But he
believes the Russian efforts so far have “succeeded far beyond Putin’s wildest dreams.” By
tapping into polarized politics and fanning conspiracy theories, he said, Russia and other
foreign actors are like “lighting a match.” He also points to China’s efforts to deflect its
own role in the crisis.

“The goal is to keep you so divided and fighting with each other that you become dysfunc-
tional and unable to respond to the threat,” he said.

Small-business help

Deadlocked over the next big coronavirus relief bill, Congress shifted its attention to a
more modest overhaul of smallbusiness aid in hopes of helping employers reopen shops
and survive the pandemic.

Bipartisan legislation that would give small employers more time to take advantage of fed-
eral subsidies for payroll and other costs is expected to pass the House this week, as law-
makers return to Washington for an abbreviated twoday session.

Yet absent from the agenda are formal talks between congressional leaders on the next
phase of the federal coronavirus response. Democrats have already pushed a $3 trillionplus
measure through the House, but negotiations with the Gopcontrolled Senate and White
House have yet to begin.

“We can’t keep propping up the economy forever,” Senate Majority Leader Mitch Mccon-
nell said Tuesday in Lexington. It was one of his first public appearances in his home state
of Kentucky since midmarch due to the pandemic.

“The ultimate solution is to begin to get back to normal,” he said. “There are three things
that are essential to have full normalcy — testing, treatment and vaccine.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200527/page/1/textview 2/2
