2020. 6. 17. Athletes react to Floyd’s death

Athletes react to Floyd’s death

The Washington Post - 1 Jun 2020 - A1 - BY CINDY BOREN cindy.boren@washpost.com Gene Wang contributed to this
report.

[Sr
ee

  

_  - © Wait
Ohio State basketball player Seth Towns was detained by Columbus police as he took part
in protests Friday over the death of George Floyd in the custody of Minneapolis police. The
graduate transfer from Harvard was one of many athletes who protested or spoke out this
weekend as Floyd’s death caused outrage in cities across the United States.
After being released, Towns tweeted encouragement to others. “To those who are silent,
speak up — to those who are hurting, unite; and for those who are fighting with the
weapons of love and justice, keep going. I’m right there with you!”
Floyd, a black man, died Monday after saying “I can’t breathe” and calling for his mother
as Derek Chauvin, a white police officer, knelt on his neck for more than eight minutes
with three other officers present. All four were fired; Chauvin was charged with third-de-
gree murder and second-degree manslaughter.
As protests erupted across the country, Towns, who graduated Thursday from Harvard
with a bachelor’s degree in sociology, found himself in a surreal situation in Columbus.
“In a span of just 24 hours, I walked across a Harvard virtual graduation stage into the
back of [a] police van alongside other peaceful protestors — both of which I am equally
proud of,” Towns tweeted Saturday with an image of officers taking him away.
“T, with so many others, met in downtown Columbus, Ohio, to peacefully protest the mur-
der of George Floyd, Breonna Taylor and the countless other unarmed American citizens
who have been murdered by those who profess to keep the peace.
“To express our sympathies and condolences to their families, loved ones and all justice
seeking people devastated by their senseless deaths, we gathered to cry out their names.
We sought to give voice to those whose voices were hushed; to name those whose breath
was taken.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200601/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Athletes react to Floyd’s death

Video shows Towns repeating, “Say his name!” as officers pull his hands behind his back
and protesters responding, “George Floyd!” A protester yelled to police that Towns
“wasn’t touching anybody,” and another added, “That is a Harvard graduate right there!”
Towns, who was not arrested, told ESPN on Saturday that he “won’t stop” taking action.
“T will continue to use my voice to speak out for the people who are unheard, and that’s
what I did. Voice is so important,” Towns said. “And when I say ‘voice,’ I’m not talking
about speaking, per se; I’m talking about actions. I’m talking about going out and protest-
ing and doing your duty as a member of this democracy.”

The protests were noticed in Germany, where Weston Mckennie, an American soccer star
playing for Schalke in the Bundesliga, wore an armband that bore the message “Justice for
George” on his left biceps during a game Saturday against Werder Bremen. “To be able to
use my platform to bring attention to a problem that has been going on [too] long feels
good!!!" he wrote on social media. “We have to stand up for what we believe in and I be-
lieve that it is time that we are heard!”

Figures from across sports were stunned by the violence. NBA legend

A college player protesting in Ohio, a U.S. soccer standout in Germany and NBA legends are
among many sports figures adding their voices to calls for justice after the death of George
Floyd

Michael Jordan released a statement through his spokeswoman Sunday afternoon, saying:
“T am deeply saddened, truly pained and plain angry. I see and feel everyone’s pain, out-
rage and frustration. I stand with those who are calling out the ingrained racism and vio-
lence toward people of color in our country. We have had enough.”

Vanessa Bryant, the widow of Kobe Bryant, tweeted an image of her late husband in one of
the “I can’t breathe” T-shirts NBA players wore in 2014 to protest the death of Eric
Garner, who died after being placed in a chokehold by New York police.

“My husband wore this shirt years ago and yet here we are again,” Bryant wrote on
Instagram. “Life is so fragile. Life is so unpredictable. Life is too short. Let’s share and em-
brace the beautiful qualities and similarities we all share as people.”

In Atlanta, Jaylen Brown of the Boston Celtics led a peaceful protest walk Saturday. Brown,
a Georgia native, coordinated gatherings of other protesters on social media and carried a
sign that read “I can’t breathe.” The crowd chanted: “No justice, no peace. No racist po-
lice.”

Washington Mystics guard Natasha Cloud authored an essay for the Players’ Tribune ti-
tled, “Your Silence Is a Knee on My Neck.”

“The millions of people who are helping to protect those racist cops, and who are helping
to insulate those in power, by staying ‘ neutral.’ That right there is what’s exhausting to
me,” Cloud wrote. “It’s all the people who think that — in 2020!! — they can still some-
how just politely opt out of this....

“And those are the people who I wanted to write this for.”

Joe Burrow, the Heisman Trophywinning quarterback who was the No. 1 NFL draft pick of
the Cincinnati Bengals, tweeted: “The black community needs our help. They have been
unheard for far too long. Open your ears, listen, and speak. This isn’t politics. This is hu-
man rights.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200601/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Athletes react to Floyd’s death

Torrey Smith, a former NFL wide receiver, reminded people to not lose focus. “There is al-
ways a peaceful protest that turns violent,” he tweeted Sunday morning. “This makes folks
forget about the cause and the peaceful initial demonstration. It’s a vicious cycle that other
people use as a way [to] deflect from the real issues. Keep justice at the forefront of the
conversation.”

Colin Kaepernick, the quarterback who has been unemployed in the NFL since he took a
knee during the national anthem to raise awareness of police brutality and injustice,
tweeted Thursday: “When civility leads to death, revolting is the only logical reaction. The
cries for peace will rain down, and when they do, they will land on deaf ears, because your
violence has brought this resistance. We have the right to fight back! Rest in Power George
Floyd.”

Joe Lockhart, a former White House press secretary and current CNN commentator who
was the NFL’S vice president of communications when President Trump said in 2017 that
any protesting player should be fired, called for a team to sign Kaepernick, who has not
played in the league since the 2016 season.

On Saturday, the NFL put out a statement from Commissioner Roger Goodell that read in
part: “The NFL family is greatly saddened by the tragic events across our country. The
protesters’ reactions to these incidents reflect the pain, anger and frustration that so many
of us feel.” It went on to say that “[there] remains an urgent need for action.”

In an op-ed for the Los Angeles Times, former NBA superstar Kareem Abdul-jabbar wrote:
“Yes, protests often are used as an excuse for some to take advantage, just as when fans
celebrating a hometown sports team championship burn cars and destroy storefronts. I
don’t want to see stores looted or even buildings burn. But African Americans have been
living in a burning building for many years, choking on the smoke as the flames burn
closer and closer. Racism in America is like dust in the air. It seems invisible — even if
you’re choking on it — until you let the sun in. Then you see it’s everywhere. As long as we
keep shining that light, we have a chance of cleaning it wherever it lands. But we have to
stay vigilant because it’s always still in the air.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200601/page/1/textview 3/3
