2020. 6. 18. McLoud man faces federal weapons charge

McLoud man faces federal weapons charge

The Oklahoman - 6 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Nolan Clay Staff writer nclay@oklahoman.com

A McLoud man wrote t hat a future civil war will be a “blast” and did shooting training
with a silhouette marked POLICE, the FBI alleged Friday.

ry

Christopher Steven Ledbetter, 29, was charged Friday in Oklahoma City federal court with
illegally possessing a fully automated machine gun.

“T love you, mom,” he said after his initial appearance.

“T love you,” his mother, Joann Johnson, replied.

The FBI on Thursday arrested hi mona state warrant and searched his family' s property
inMc Loud. Agents reported

ammunition, bottles of liquid, fireworks, mortar tubes and possible grenades.

His mother on Thursday blamed the raid and arrest on the family's ongoing dispute with
police in McLoud. She told TV reporters the dispute began when a neighbor who is a police
officer used their trash bin without permission. She declined to comment Friday after her
son's initial appearance.

“I'm too upset,” she said. The intensity of the dispute is apparent in videos posted by Led-
better on the internet. In one, while armed with a rifle, Ledbetter curses a police officer
who had met with his mother to hear her complaints. He became angry when the officer
told him to step out of the police building with his gun.

He could be heard on the video telling the officer he was going to drive off without his seat
belt.

“Tf it's worth you killing me over, well do that and I'll spill your ... blood, too,” he said. “If
you want to pull your weapon on me, I'll defend myself. ... There's a reckoning coming for
you. I'm one of ... many.”

The dispute led the McLoud police chief on Wednesday to issue a news release to dispel ru-
mors that the police department had been taken over by an “outside group” and that he
and his officers had been relieved of duty.

“We have and will always proudly serve the citizens of McLoud,” Police Chief Wes Elliott
wrote.

In an affidavit, an FBI agent reported Ledbetter admitted after his arrest that he possessed
“an illegal select fire AK- 47- style carbine.” The FBI recovered the weapon from his vehi-
cle. The agent explained it was illegal because it was capable of functioning as a machine
gun.

The agent reported Led better fired an

AK-47-style carbine in fully automatic mode on a video posted on YouTube May 4 titled
“Training.” In the video, eight individuals engage in tactical training on entering a room,
according to the affidavit. “The first paper target, which is shot with full auto, is a silhou-
ette labeled “POLICE' with a badge drawn over the left chest.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/20200606/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. McLoud man faces federal weapons charge

The agent reported Ledbetter had a conversation on Facebook in March about a “boog,”
which is short for “boogaloo” and refers to “a future civil war.” In the conversation, Led-
better wrote, “That will be better than waiting to get offed everyday.”

He also wrote that it will be “a blast while you're getting them” but bad “when they get
any one of us ha ha,” according to the affidavit.

Ledbetter in April showed up at protest against “stay-athome” orders in Kansas and ad-
mitted to a TV reporter he had “illegal weapons on me,” the agent reported.

“But none of them are going to do anything because I'm a peaceful person. Right?” he is
quoted as saying.

In a speech outside the state Capitol in Oklahoma in May, Ledbetter said he spent four
years in the Marines and later f ought as a volunteer with “Kurdish allies” against ISIS. He
said he has been threatened “to be killed” many times since coming home to Oklahoma for
carrying a weapon.

“T will not follow any laws further more against peaceful freedom!” he said. “If they are
using violence on peaceful freedom, I will resist in open defiance. ... And I will defend my-
self. ... Liberty or death!”

In an affidavit, an FBI agent reported Ledbetter admitted after his arrest that he possessed
“an illegal select fire AK-47style carbine.” The FBI recovered the weapon from his vehicle.
The agent explained it was illegal because it was capable of functioning as a machine gun.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/20200606/page/1/textview 2/2
