2020. 6. 18. Group watches service together in OKC.

Group watches service together in OKC

The Oklahoman « 5 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Adam Kemp Staff writer akemp@oklahoman.com

One by one the group rose to it feet, paying tribute to the memory of a man they had never
met from nearly 800 miles away.

A

 

Standing under the shade of the stage on the north side of Scissortail Park, more than a
dozen strangers gathered together to watch the memorial service for George Floyd, a black
man who died after a white officer pressed his knee into Floyd's neck for minutes, even af-
ter he stopped moving. Floyd's death has set off a wave of protests and demonstrations
against racial injustice and police brutality across the nation.

For eight minutes and 46 seconds, they stood together in silence.

“T think sometimes we become a little detached from who this man was,” said Aletha Wil-
liams, 34. “Seeing his family, You can see their pain, you can empathize with that. If you
didn't have motivation, this would definitely give you a little more motivation to get in-
volved.”

While family members of Floyd, celebrities, civil rights activists and politicians

sang “Amazing Grace,” prayed and listened to stories about Floyd's life in a televised cele-
bration and mourning of a man whose death has caused civil unrest across the country, the
gathering in downtown Oklahoma City remained small but enthralled as they watched the
service on a flat-screen on the side of a truck.

Michael Wilhoite said he had seen the event posted on Facebook and wanted to watch the
memorial with other people.

“This man's murder has become a worldwide movement,” he said.

“So many people have finally just said, enough is enough. We have to take a stand and fight
back against these injustices. That's really powerful.”

Courtland Free, 28, said she had been wondering about the results of the protests that have
been happening in Oklahoma City and across the nation all week. But Free said hearing the
Rev. Al Sharpton speak about visiting the spot where Floyd died filled her with a sense of
purpose.

“He talked about how George's story is the story of most black people,” Free said. “How
it's time for people to take the knee off our necks.

“That's what we are fighting for. That's the change we are fighting for.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/20200605/page/1/textview 4/1
