2020. 6. 17. Intelligence scheme

Intelligence scheme

The Washington Post - 12 Jun 2020 - A1 - BY RACHEL WEINER AND TOM JACKMAN rachel.weiner@washpost.com
tom.jackman@washpost.com Devlin Barrett contributed to this report.

The former DEA chief spokesman admitted that he pretended to be a CIA operative in a
$4.4 million scam.

-

The former chief spokesman for the Drug Enforcement Administration admitted Thursday
that he ran a $4.4 million scam by manipulating officials from the DEA, the Army, the Of-
fice of the Director of National Intelligence and the National Institutes of Health as he
falsely claimed he was part of a covert task force doing secret operations in Africa.
Garrison Courtney, 44, of Tampa acknowledged in Alexandria federal court that between
2012 and 2016, he perpetuated a complicated scheme involving at least three other un-
named individuals, seven public officials and 13 companies.

He convinced victims that he was an undercover operative for the Central Intelligence
Agency, then persuaded private companies to pay him as a secret officer. He then finagled
a job at a federal agency where he steered contracts to those companies as repayment,
telling both sides it was part of the classified project.

Courtney was the chief DEA spokesman from 2005 to 2009, a spokesman for the Depart-
ment of Homeland Security before that, and has been working as a private consultant since
2010, according to his Linkedin page. He previously worked as chief of staff to Florida Rep.
Katherine Harris.

But he never worked for the CIA, although he interviewed for a job there in 2006 and was
extended a tentative employment offer that lapsed two years later.

He admitted in his plea hearing before U.S. District Judge Liam O’ grady that his ploy to
convince companies that he was with the CIA cost those companies nearly $4.5 million.
Courtney agreed to make restitution in that amount and also to forfeit almost $2 million in
cash and assets.

“It’s an understatement to describe this fraud scheme as a murky tour through the shad-
ows of U.S. intelligence,” said Steven Leitess, an attorney for the victim who lost the most
money in the case, the Virginia-based investment firm Capefirst Funding. “Mr. Courtney
adroitly manipulated government officials and private individuals for several years for the
purpose of enriching himself.”

Capefirst paid off a $1.9 million Courtney debt owed to another company, under the pre-
tense that the government was planning to take over the firm and would offer reimburse-
ment.

Courtney told multiple private companies he was a covert CIA operative and that they
needed to hire him as cover for his secret CIA activities. He persuaded the companies to

   

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200612/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Intelligence scheme

sign nondisclosure agreements about their work with him and created fake letters claim-
ing to grant blanket immunity to participants in the classified program. He claimed his
identity and many of his actions were “highly classified,” according to the statement of
facts. The task force he made up was called “Alpha214” or “A214.”

Courtney also convinced public officials that they had been selected to participate in the
purported classified program. Public officials echoed Courtney’s lies at meetings with cor-
porate victims, bolstering his credibility. They also gave him access to Secure Compart-
mented Information Facilities, or SCIFS, where he would hold supposedly classified meet-
ings with victims. Some clients were searched or deprived of their phones before meetings,
and he would tell them to stay off social media and limit credit card use to avoid foreign
surveillance.

When some victims started raising questions, according to the plea documents, Courtney
would accuse them of mishandling classified information and threaten them with prose-
cution. He accused one suspicious individual of being an Iranian spy.

It was, O’grady said, “a way to deflect suspicion away from your own fraud.”

He fooled a high-ranking officer in the Air Force, according to prosecutors, and a retired
highranking officer in the Navy.

Courtney also lied about killing hundreds while serving in the Army during the Gulf War,
sustaining lung injuries from blazing oil fields and escaping a ricin poisoning attempt by a
hostile foreign intelligence service.

In fact, prosecutors say Courtney joined the Army after the war and had lung problems
from asthma exacerbated by fighting forest fires in Missouri.

At one point, the statement of facts said, he persuaded one company to hire the adult child
of a public official, who was not otherwise qualified for the job, on the pretense that it was
necessary for a covert operation. The official and the company were not identified.
Courtney persuaded the National Institutes of Health’s Information Technology Acquisi-
tion and Assessment Center, or NITAAC, to hire him as a covert CIA officer. Once there, he
persuaded the agency to issue solesource contracts to some of the companies that had al-
ready hired him, O’grady said, “because of national security concerns.”

Prosecutors would not say how Courtney’s scheme was uncovered. Leitess said his client
has been involved in the investigation for years and hopes to see more charges. Garrison
admitted another individual, unnamed in proceedings, also posed as a CIA officer.

“Mr. Courtney apologizes to his victims and accepts full responsibility for his actions,”
said his attorney Stuart Sears. “We will not comment any further on today’s proceedings,
and we ask you to respect his family’s privacy.”

Pending sentencing, Courtney was released on a $25,000 unsecured bond with electronic
monitoring. The hearing before O’ grady was open to the public by phone teleconference, a
concession the court has made for the coronavirus pandemic.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200612/page/1/textview 2/2
