2020. 6. 17. HHS: Top watchdog warns against political intrusion.

HHS: Top watchdog warns against political intrusion.

The Washington Post - 27 May 2020 - A1 - BY AMY GOLDSTEIN amy.goldstein@washpost.com

The chief watchdog for the Department of Health and Human Services, being replaced as
part of President Trump’s purge of inspectors general, told lawmakers on Tuesday that
freedom from political intrusion is “a key safeguard for the programs we oversee.”

 

Christi Grimm, HHS’S principal deputy inspector general, spoke out for the first time since
she was excoriated by the president for a report from her office that found “severe short-
ages” earlier this spring of supplies to help hospitals cope with the novel coronavirus pan-
demic.

Grimm defended that inquiry and its findings, telling members of the House Committee on
Oversight and Reform that it was warranted, though she said the department has since ad-
dressed some of the problems it identified.

“Personally and professionally, I cannot let the idea of providing unpopular information
drive decision-making in the work we do,” Grimm said, speaking calmly as the sole wit-
ness at a briefing conducted by videoconference. Calling independence “the cornerstone of
what any office of inspector general does,” she said government watchdogs must “go right
down the middle in providing facts and letting facts take us where they may.”

A career employee with the HHS inspector general’s office for more than two decades,
Grimm said Tuesday that she and colleagues are pursuing 14 additional reviews of the
department’s response to the pandemic, which has resulted in more than 1.6 million cases
across the country of covid-19, the disease caused by the virus, and more than 98,000
deaths as of Tuesday.

Inquiries, she said, are exploring the operation of the Strategic National Stockpile of emer-
gency supplies, the development and distribution of tests by the Centers for Disease Con-
trol and Prevention, and the process by which the Food and Drug Administration approved
tests developed by outside laboratories. They also are delving into safety issues in nursing
homes, which account for a disproportionate share of cases and deaths; the role of the HHS
agency that runs Medicare and Medicaid; and further work on hospitals’ preparedness.
“We are operating as we did on May 1,” the date Trump announced a replacement for her
as the office’s top official, Grimm said. “We are plowing ahead.”

The two-hour briefing was laced with partisanship, with members of the minority party
repeatedly complaining that the committee should have convened in person for a formal
hearing. They prodded Grimm to address issues beyond her office’s scope, such as why the
pandemic shut down the U.S. economy. And they suggested that the findings on hospital
shortages were inflated. “I am deeply concerned with the flawed methodology,” said Rep.
Jim Jordan (Ohio), the committee’s top Republican.

Democrats, meanwhile, condemned Trump’s reaction to the report. The committee’s
chairwoman, Rep. Carolyn B. Maloney (N.Y.), said the president “personally attacked Ms.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200527/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. HHS: Top watchdog warns against political intrusion.

Grimm — and for no valid reason. .. . [I]t seems clear that he just wanted everyone to pre-
tend there were no challenges in our health-care system.”

Rep. Jackie Speier (Calif.) said she was concerned that such White House reactions could
prompt inspectors general to “feel they cannot provide any bad news without fearing they
will lose their job.”

Inspectors general are internal watchdogs appointed to keep an independent eye on the
agencies they are assigned to monitor. In Grimm’s case, she had been HHS’S principal
deputy inspector general since January, a role that put her in charge of the office for which
she has worked since 1999. She said her office monitors 300 programs in the sprawling
department.

She still is in charge for now, until the assistant U.S. attorney Trump has nominated to re-
place her is confirmed. Grimm appeared to be speaking to the committee from her office,
with an HHS flag and an American flag as a backdrop.

Her pending replacement makes her one of five inspectors general the president has de-
posed since early April. She and two others were removed on Friday nights, a time long fa-
vored by administrations eager to minimize attention to controversial White House ac-
tions.

The others the president removed were in charge of monitoring the intelligence commu-
nity and the departments of Defense, Transportation and, most recently, State. Most of the
five had been critical of the administration’s response to the pandemic. One had a role ina
document that contributed to the House vote in mid-january to impeach the president.
Their removals have ignited outrage from congressional Democrats, good-government
advocates and a few Republicans.

The issue spilled into the presidential race Tuesday, with a statement from the campaign
of former vice president Joe Biden, the presumptive Democratic nominee.

“Instead of addressing the glaring, persistent shortages in testing and protective equip-
ment identified by his own administration almost two months ago, Donald Trump has...
shirked responsibility and blamed others instead of doing the work needed for us to stop
this virus, save lives and safely re-open our economy,” said Kate Bedingfield, a Biden
campaign spokeswoman.

Grimm was the lead author of the April 3 report that said hospitals were facing a “severe
shortage” of testing kits and protective gear, hampering their ability to help contain the
virus. The report was based on a survey of 343 hospitals in 46 states during five days in late
March, and its conclusions contradicted White Houses assertions that the nation was well-
fortified with virus -fighting necessities.

The survey found that some hospitals were so desperate for masks that they resorted to
scrounging them from auto-body shops and nail salons. At least one hospital, it found,
was making its own hand sanitizer by mixing gel used for ultrasounds with alcohol from a
nearby distillery.

The day the report came out, Trump was asked about it during a White House coronavirus
briefing. He flatly characterized it as “wrong” and asserted, “We are doing a better job [at
testing] than anybody else in the world.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200527/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. HHS: Top watchdog warns against political intrusion.

He demanded to know from reporters in the briefing room when Grimm had been ap-
pointed and focused on the fact that she had been in the office during the Obama adminis-
tration, even though her tenure had begun nearly a decade before the start of that presi-
dency.

Twenty-eight days later, Trump moved to replace her and nominated Jason Weida, an as-
sistant U.S. attorney in Boston, as the permanent replacement for the previous HHS in-
spector general, who retired last year.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200527/page/1/textview 3/3
