2020. 6. 17. DEMOCRATS

DEMOCRATS

proposed a farreaching overhaul of police procedures and accountability
Monday.

The Dallas Morning News - 9 Jun 2020 - 1A - By LISA MASCARO

WASHINGTON — Democrats proposed a farreaching overhaul of police procedures and ac-
countability Monday, a sweeping legislative response to the mass protests denouncing the

 

The political outlook is deeply uncertain for the legislation in a polarized election year.
President Donald Trump is staking out a tough “law and order” approach in the face of the
outpouring of demonstrations and demands to reimagine policing in America.

“We cannot settle for anything less than transformative structural change,” said House
Speaker Nancy Pelosi, drawing on the nation’s history of slavery.

Before unveiling the package, House and Senate Democrats held a moment of silence at the
Capitol’s Emancipation Hall, reading the names of George Floyd and many others killed
with police interactions. They knelt for 8 minutes and 46 seconds — now a symbol of po-
lice brutality and violence — the length of time prosecutors say Floyd was pinned under a
white police officer’s knee before he died.

Trump, who met with law enforcement officials at the White House, characterized
Democrats as having “gone CRAZY!”

As activists call for restructuring police departments and even to “defund the police,” the
president tweeted, “LAW & ORDER, NOT DEFUND AND ABOLISH THE POLICE.” He de-
clared later, “We won’t be dismantling our police.”

Democratic leaders pushed back, saying their proposal would not eliminate police depart-
ments — a decision for cities and states — but establish new standards and oversight.

Joe Biden, the presumed Democratic presidential nominee, “does not believe that police
should be defunded,” said spokesman Andrew Bates.

The Justice in Policing Act, the most ambitious law enforcement reforms from Congress in
years, confronts several aspects of policing that have come under strong criticism, espe-
cially as more and more police violence is captured on cellphone video and shared widely
across the nation and the world.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200609/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. DEMOCRATS

The package would limit legal protections for police, create a national database of exces-
siveforce incidents and ban police chokeholds, among other changes.

It would revise the federal criminal police misconduct statute to make it easier to prose-
cute officers who are involved in “reckless” misconduct and it would change “qualified
immunity” protections to more broadly enable damage claims against police in lawsuits.
The legislation would ban racial profiling, boost requirements for police body cameras and
limit the transfer of military equipment to local jurisdictions.

Overall, the bill seeks to provide greater transparency of police behavior in several ways.
For one, it would grant subpoena power to the Justice Department to conduct “pattern and
practice” investigations of potential misconduct and help states conduct independent in-
vestigations.

And it would create a “National Police Misconduct Registry,” a database to try to prevent
officers from transferring from one department to another with past misconduct unde-
tected, the draft says.

A longsought federal antilynching bill that has stalled in Congress is included in the pack-
age.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200609/page/1/textview 2/2
