2020. 6. 18. Nursing homes can begin phased reopening

Nursing homes can begin phased reopening

The Oklahoman « 13 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Carmen Forman Staff writer cforman@oklahoman.com

Starting Monday, Oklahoma nursing homes can begin a phased approach to allow visita-
tions to resume, Gov. Kevin Stitt's office announced Friday—the same day the state re-
ported its largest single-day increase of new COVID-19 cases.

In order to resume family visitations, nursing homes will have to have an absence of
COVID-19 for at least two weeks and will need to follow standards on staffing levels, avail-
ability of personal protective equipment and local hospital capacity.

Care Providers Oklahoma President and CEO Steven Buck said he expects the reopening
process to unfold cautiously.

“Visitors to skilled nursing facilities should expect to see facilities enforcing new measures
that impact when visitations can occur, limits to physical contact and proximity to resi-
dents, and other safety precautions,” he said. “We appreciate the patience and under-
standing of our

residents and their families thus far and ask for their continued cooperation in the days,
weeks, and months ahead.”

Only nursing homes in counties that have seen a two-week downward trend of COVID- 19
cases will be able to resume visitations, according to detailed guidance released by the Ok-
lahoma State Department of Health. If local conditions worsen, facilities should cease visi-
tations.

Visitations at nursing homes and long-term care facilities have been restricted since mid-
March to try to prevent COVID- 1 9 outbreaks. The elderly are particularly vulnerable to the
respiratory virus.

The department said most nursing homes and long-term care facilities are in the third and
final phase of reopening because of the absence of COVID-19 for more than two weeks.
“The Health Department has worked closely with communities and providers on safely
easing in visitations for residents at nursing homes and long-term care fa ci lities across
Oklahoma,” said interim Health Commissioner Lance Frye. “Our mission is to support the
mental health and quality of life for residents, while also taking into consideration the re-
alities of COVID- 1 9. We encourage families as they reunite with their loved ones to con-
sider getting tested in advance and to wear masks for visitations and closely follow height-
ened protocols at the facilities.”

All long-term care facilities in Phase 3 will have to develop a visitation policy that limits
the number of visitors and visits, mandates advanced hygiene practices and addresses the
use of personal protective equipment, such as face masks. Facilities are encouraged to have
most visitations occur outside.

Other guidelines for nursing homes in Phase 3 include:

- All staff must wear a face mask.

- All residents and staff must be screened at least once a day for symptoms of COVID-19.

- Visitors must be screened upon entry.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/2020061 3/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. Nursing homes can begin phased reopening

- Trips outside the facility that are not medically necessary should be limited, as should
group activities.

- Communal dining will be allowed so long as tables are spaced six feet apart and seating is
limited.

If a facility in Phase 3 of reopening discovers a case of COVID-19, the facility must return to
Phase 1.

Most visitations are still prohibited in Phase 1. Exceptions can be made for com passionate
care and end-of-life visits. Entry of nonessential health care personnel is still restricted.
Leading Age Oklahoma remains concerned for the health and safety of re sidents and staff
at this time, said Mary Brinkley, executive director for the organization that provides ser-
vices to some 125 nursing homes and longterm facilities.

“Our members applaud the Health Department for issuing specific guidelines for nursing
facilities that allow providers to implement more restrictive visitation policies as appro-
priate,” she said.

Within the next month, all nursing homes and long-term care facilities will have to inform
the state who is serving as their infection prevention expert. That health care professional
will have to meet additional guidelines for assessing and reporting infection control and
prevention measures.

Roughly 20% of the state's COVID- 19 cases and 53% of the state' s deaths have occurred
in long-term care facilities, according to State Department of Health data.

More than 110 nu rsing homes and long-term care facilities have reported cases. Each of
Oklahoma's 77 counties has had at least one long-term care facility report at least one case
of COVID-19.

The number of facilities with reported cases increased as the state went on a recent testing
blitz to test all longterm care residents and staff. More than 41,000 people were tested.
About 1,300, or 3%, of those tested positive, according to the governor's office.

All long-term care facilities in Phase 3 will have to develop a visitation policy that limits
the number of visitors and visits, mandates advanced hygiene practices and addresses the
use of personal protective equipment, such as face masks. Facilities are encouraged to have
most visitations occur outside.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/2020061 3/page/1/textview 2/2
