2020. 6. 17. Republican critiques of Trump grow

Republican critiques of Trump grow
Floyd remembered at services across U.S.

The Washington Post : 5 Jun 2020: A1 : BY DAVID A. FAHRENTHOLD, PAUL KANE AND JOSH DAWSEY

A Republican senator and President Trump’s former chief of staff Thursday joined a grow-
ing group of critics blasting Trump’s call to deploy troops to quell protests against police
brutality, a sign that opposition to the president’s approach is spreading beyond his usual
political adversaries.

   

One day after Trump’s former defense secretary, Jim Mattis, ended his silence and accused
Trump of trying to divide Americans and making “a mockery of the Constitution,” Sen.
Lisa Murkowski (RAlaska) called Mattis’s statements “true and honest and necessary and
overdue.”

Meanwhile, former White House chief of staff John F. Kelly, himself a retired U.S. Marine
Corps general, called Mattis “an honorable man” and chastised Trump for claiming in a
tweet that he had fired Mattis, who resigned in December 2018 after Trump insisted on
pulling U.S. troops abruptly out of Syria.

“The president did not fire him. He did not ask for his resignation,” Kelly, who served as
Trump’s chief of staff from August 2017 to December 2018, said in an interview. “The
president has clearly forgotten how it actually happened or is confused.”

Murkowski and Kelly are the latest Republicans, including former president George W.
Bush, Sen. Tim Scott (R-S.C.) and former national security adviser Condoleezza Rice, to ei-
ther criticize Trump’s approach or more broadly embrace the demonstrators mounting
impassioned protests of racial injustice and police brutality across the country.

Those passions showed no signs of dying down Thursday. In Minneapolis, crowds remem-
bered George Floyd, whose death at the hands of the police triggered the current protests.
They were joined by a memorial in New York and a remembrance by Democrat

ic senators at the U.S. Capitol.

And in Georgia, a man who helped chase down Ahmaud Arbery, the jogger killed earlier
this year, said Arbery’s shooter called Arbery a “f---ing n----- ” as he lay dying in the

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200605/page/1/textview 115
2020. 6. 17. Republican critiques of Trump grow

road, a Georgia Bureau of Investigation agent testified in court.

Despite the criticism from Murkowski and others, there was little sign Thursday of a
wholesale defection by Republicans from Trump, as many GOP leaders remained silent on
the president’s recent words and actions. Still, the pushback was striking after 31/2 years
during which Trump’s words and actions have prompted little more than occasional ex-
pressions of dismay from his allies.

‘“‘When I saw General Mattis’s comments yesterday, I felt like perhaps we’re getting to the
point where we can be more honest with the concerns that we might hold internally, and
have the courage of our own convictions to speak up,” Murkowski said.

Asked if she could still support Trump, the Alaska senator said, “I am struggling with it. I
have struggled with it for a long time.” She added, “He is duly elected our president. I will
continue to work with him. I will continue to work with this administration.”

Sen. Mitt Romney (R-utah), who has been more willing than most in his party to speak out
against Trump, called Mattis’s statement “stunning and powerful.”

“He’s an American patriot,” Romney said. “He’s an individual whose judgment I respect,
and I think the world of him. If I ever had to choose somebody to be in a foxhole with, it
would be with a General Mattis.”

The comments came as Trump responded to Mattis’s criticism by disparaging him ina
tweet.

“His primary strength was not military, but rather personal public relations,” the presi-
dent wrote. “I gave him a new life, things to do, and battles to win, but he seldom ‘ brought
home the bacon’. I didn’t like his ‘ leadership’ style or much else about him, and many
others agree. Glad he is gone!”

Trump suggested he had fired Mattis, but the former general tendered his resignation as
secretary of defense in 2018 as he disagreed with Trump’s decision to pull U.S. forces out of
Syria, numerous U.S. officials have said.

Trump also responded to Murkowski by vowing to travel to

Alaska in 2022, when she is up for reelection, to campaign against her. “Get any candidate
ready, good or bad, I don’t care, I’m endorsing,” he tweeted. “If you have a pulse, I’m with
you!”

The reaction of former military leaders as Trump has spoken of deploying the military to
quell looting and other aggressive behavior by protesters has been striking. Kelly and Mat-
tis are both retired four-star Marine generals.

So is John Allen, who criticized Trump on Wednesday in a piece in Foreign Policy magazine
for his threats to use the military on protesters and his controversial church photo op on
Monday. Allen wrote that Trump’s actions “may well signal the beginning of the end of the
American experiment.”

Still, many Republicans stuck by Trump or were silent. On Fox News on Thursday, Sen.
Lindsey O. Graham (R-S.C.) suggested Mattis had bought into a false narrative promoted
by the media.

“It is so fashionable to blame President Trump for every wrong in America, and he can be a
handful — and can he do better? Yes — but the problems we have in America today were

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200605/page/1/textview 2/5
2020. 6. 17. Republican critiques of Trump grow

not caused by President Trump,” Graham said, adding: “This is just such easy, cheap poli-
tics.”

The fireworks played out while Floyd was eulogized as a loving man whose death symbol-
ized an American sickness. Thursday’s memorial services were the start of a four-day pe-
riod of mourning for Floyd, which will conclude next week with a burial in Floyd’s home-
town of Houston.

On Wednesday in Minneapolis, the city where Floyd died, the crowd included senators,
mayors, the governor and Hollywood actors. In New York, thousands gathered. In
Washington, Democratic senators held a public remembrance.

It was a sign of the remarkable effect Floyd’s death has produced: A national groundswell
of protests over police brutality, a largely leaderless movement that has defied tear gas, a
pandemic, and looters to persist in calls for change.

But the memorials also focused on the horrific way that life ended. In Minneapolis, with
Floyd’s casket at the front of the church, the crowd stayed silent for eight minutes and 46
seconds — the amount of time that officer Derek Chauvin knelt on Floyd’s neck.

As the silence lasted and lasted, people in the crowd began to sob.

From the back, a man cried out, his voice muffled by a face mask, repeating some of
Floyd’s final words: “I can’t breathe!”

That caused many to cry even harder and another voice to call out, “I can’t breathe! I can’t
breathe!”

When the silence ended, the Rev. Al Sharpton said, “They had enough time,” referring to
the police officers involved. “Now what are we going to do with our time?”

The orations were broadcast into the surrounding neighborhood, and among those listen-
ing outside was Albert Ettinga, an immigrant from Cameroon who brought his family in
from a Minneapolis suburb. They wore Tshirts that said “I cant breathe,” across the front.
“T believe that history has begun in Minneapolis — the world is listening,” he said. “I have
kids that were born in this country, I have to really start fighting for them, and hopefully
they can rewrite history themselves.”

Sharpton and the Floyd family also announced a mass march on Washington this August to
urge Congress to pass a policing equality act.

Georgia, meanwhile, provided a reminder that the protesters’ anger is focused not only on
what happened to Floyd, but to any number of African Americans who have suffered at the
hands of police — or others.

A judge in that state ruled Thursday that three men would stand trial for murder in the
killing of Arbery, an unarmed black man who was shot in February while he was jogging.

A detective said in court that the three men had pursued Arbery in their vehicles, then cor-
nered him. After a struggle, Arbery was shot dead. The men never called 911 during the
pursuit, the detective said.

He added that one of them — 34 year-old Travis Mcmichael — uttered the words “f---ing
n----- ” as Arbery lay dying in the road.

Although Thursday’s protests were largely peaceful nationwide, there was at least one ugly
incident. In Buffalo, video from news station WBFO showed police in riot gear clearing a
largely empty plaza. An elderly man approached and officers shoved him backward —

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200605/page/1/textview 3/5
2020. 6. 17. Republican critiques of Trump grow

causing the man to stumble, fall and hit his head on the concrete. Officers walked past as
the man lay bleeding from his head. Two officers involved in the incident have been sus-
pended without pay, Capt. Jeff Rinaldo with the Buffalo Police Department said Thursday
night. Erie County Executive Mark Poloncarz later tweeted that the man was in stable con-
dition at a local hospital.

Still, around the country on Thursday, many of the memorials and demonstrations were
peaceful, even hopeful.

In Washington, the sweltering day’s crowds were smaller than they have been recently.
Rain was in the forecast, and a bigger march was planned for Saturday. But despite the
lighter crowds, crews were installing taller fences around the White House, with new con-
crete barriers behind them.

At the U.S. Capitol, Senate Democrats gathered for a moment of silence that also lasted
eight minutes and 46 seconds — their first in-person gathering since the covid-19 pan-
demic began.

The senators used a cavernous hall in the now-empty Capitol Visitor Center, standing sev-
eral feet apart. A handful of Democrats knelt on one or both knees, a symbolic action that
started with former NFL quarterback Colin Kaepernick protesting against police brutality,
but has taken on double significance after Floyd died as a result of a white officer kneeling
on his neck.

“Injustice anywhere is a threat to justice everywhere,” Senate Chaplain Barry Black said in
an opening prayer.

In Harlem, hundreds of marchers wore suits and ties to honor Floyd. They marched down
Fifth Avenue, chanting “We are not to be feared!”

Brandon Murphy, a 29-year-old fashion designer from Harlem, requested that suits and
ties be worn. He said it was an attempt to reclaim the narrative of orderly, peaceful
protests following nights of unrest.

“In our culture, when we send somebody home, we do it right,” said Stephen Lockett, 30, a
resident of Crown Heights. “You put your suit on, you wear a tie and you send that person
off. We wanted to respectfully send George Floyd off today.”

Maintenance workers, healthcare workers and other Manhattanites waiting in line at a
food pantry just off the park at 109th Street applauded the protesters.

At one point, two protesters reenacted the killing of Floyd. One played the part of Floyd, ly-
ing face down on the Fifth Avenue asphalt, and the other acted as Chauvin, who dug his
knee into the back of Floyd’s neck as Floyd declared, “I can’t breathe.” Residents of the
apartments opened their window to clap, bang pots and create a clamor of support for the
masses.

In Brooklyn, a memorial service for Floyd turned hostile when New York Mayor Bill de Bla-
sio (D) took the stage and many in the crowd booed the mayor over the city’s use of cur-
fews and aggressive actions by city police.

“De Blasio, go home,” they chanted, followed by “[expletive] your curfew.”

In the days since Floyd’s death, New York has been the scene of large peaceful protests —
but also widespread looting and accusations of police brutality. De Blasio has been criti-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200605/page/1/textview 4/5
2020. 6. 17. Republican critiques of Trump grow

cized by Trump for not using enough force, and by many residents for allowing police to
use too much.

In his speech, de Blasio said that New York needed to more fully recognize the damage of
racism, but he defended police as “doing something very difficult at this moment, and
showing a lot of restraint and trying to shepherd us through this moment to a better and
more peaceful moment.” He was loudly booed, and only spoke for about two minutes.
Several state and city officials used their time atop the podium to criticize de Blasio.

“This is supposed to be the progressive beacon of this country, and we are failing,” said
New York City Public Advocate Jumaane D. Williams (D). “We have the wrong president, we
have the wrong governor, and we have the wrong mayor.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200605/page/1/textview 5/5
