2020. 6. 17. ‘March with us’: Activist planned a protest with the police.

‘March with us’: Activist planned a protest with the police.
In Silver Spring, officers took a knee along with more than 200 people

The Washington Post : 9 Jun 2020 - A1 : BY DAN MORSE

Michael Turner’s encounter years ago with Montgomery County police, as he explained in
a recent email to a department commander, was appalling.
¥ i i a

   

Turner was 18. Officers had come to break up a party in the suburban county and quickly
focused on Turner and his fellow African American friends. They checked IDS. No one was
drunk. The cops asked them to move along.

“One officer looks at us,” Turner wrote, “and says, ‘Now go back to your projects.’ ”

The broader context of the email, written eight days ago, was Turner’s effort to explain
why he wanted a protest in downtown Silver Spring.

“We come in peace, commander,” wrote Turner, 36. “March with us. It’s time for a
change. I’m ready to help, are you?”

The email set off six days of written and phone dialogue between Turner and Capt. Darren
Francke, who commands the Silver Spring police district for the Montgomery County
department.

It culminated Sunday afternoon when Turner, Francke and three other Montgomery
County police officers took a knee in front of more than 200 protest

ers facing them and stretching half a block down Georgia Avenue.

Everyone sat still for 2 minutes 53 seconds, the estimated time George Floyd lay uncon-
scious with his neck pinned below the knee of a Minneapolis police officer.

For two weeks, demonstrators protesting police and the killing of Floyd have poured into
streets across the United States. The protests have included countless, spontaneous mo-
ments of cooperation between protesters and police, with officers taking a knee and chiefs
mixing and mingling with the crowds. But Turner’s protest in the sprawling suburb just
miles north of the District had a different twist: It was a demonstration put together with
the active help of the police.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200609/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. ‘March with us’: Activist planned a protest with the police.

It didn’t start off that way. Turner said his initial approach to the police, on June 1, was
borne out of suspicion related to events the day before.

The Germantown resident grew up in Montgomery County, played football through high
school and studied at Montgomery College, where he now works in the financial aid office.
Turner is a member of two local go-go groups: High Gravity Band and New Vision.

The evening of May 31, he recalled, he received a text message about possible rioting
nearby. Then he heard helicopters overhead, grew concerned things were getting out of
hand and drove to see it.

Turner said the situation was tense.

Young protesters were yelling at police officers parked inside their cars. Turner tried to in-
tervene but said the first two officers he approached ignored him. He moved on to other
officers. Two got out, he said, and agreed to take a knee to honor Floyd. At least six more
followed suit.

The next morning, with video of him and the kneeling officers popping on social media,
Turner contacted police, trying to find out whether they had pushed out the videos to gen-
erate good publicity.

Turner’s concern: The police were trying to take credit for the officers’ positive interac-
tions with protesters without getting his side of it.

Three hours later, with no response, Turner announced on Twitter that he was forming a
protest for the coming weekend in downtown Silver Spring: “Come with peace in your
heart and your voice to be heard. If you come to LOOT YOU WILL BE HANDLED. @mcpnews
I reached out to you. And every one has seen it. I have heard nothing back.”

Hours later, the department contacted him, as did Francke, who as commander of the Sil-
ver Spring district was in charge of policing the area. Turner learned that the police hadn’t
pushed out the videos. He dashed off a 1,500-word email to him.

“T’ve never done this,” Turner said of the protest planning, “so I’ Il try my best to explain
myself the best I can.”

He described his upbringing and the encounter with police officers outside the party in
2002.

“They saw the white kids running. They did not chase, but harassed us,” Turner wrote.
“From that point, I will not lie, I have kind of had a chip on my shoulder towards the po-
lice. Hatred towards the police.”

“T get how hard it is to be a public servant. Trust me I do,” he wrote. “But something has to
be done. We the people of Montgomery County understand that you all cannot do anything
about what has happen in Minnesota and you all did not do that. However, you have done
bad here as well.”

Montgomery County has faced allegations of excessive use of force over the past two years,
starting with a patrol officer’s fatal shooting in June 2018 of a man who charged at him ina
residential parking lot. Last year, a Montgomery officer was convicted of misdemeanor as-
sault for driving his knee into the neck area of a handcuffed man who was lying face down
on a sidewalk. And last month, a patrol sergeant fatally shot a man who charged at him
armed with a large kitchen knife.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200609/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. ‘March with us’: Activist planned a protest with the police.

Turner told Francke that a joint protest with police would be a start to help mend relations
with the community. Turner detailed his broader goals: Justice for George Floyd. Education
reform. (“I know that isn’t your department but I’m sure you understand.”) The release of
inmates locked up over marijuana laws. A rollout of police-sponsored teen centers to en-
gage officers with kids. A detailed study of Montgomery arrest statistics to analyze
whether minorities were being disproportionately targeted.

In closing the letter to Francke, Turner said he’d been criticized for fist-bumping the
kneeling officers the day before, with some Twitter users accusing him of being a police
stooge.

‘What I have had to deal with negatively in the last 24 hours for dapping up your officers, I
get it,” he wrote. “Now it’s time for you all to get us.”

To Francke, it all made sense. He had served in the Pennsylvania Army National Guard and
joined the Montgomery police in 1996. A father of three, including a daughter who also
came to the protest, he previously commanded the department’s major crimes division —
supervising murder investigations throughout the county.

“Thank you for sharing your story,” Francke wrote. “I don’t blame you for having a chip
on your shoulder. I am not proud of some things that a few officers did before and now. ... I
am saddened and angered by what happened to George Floyd, and a number of other
events over many years that were clearly violations of the values that the vast majority of
officers have.”

“My officers and I will march with you,” Francke added. “With your assistance we will also
help to keep the event safe from those that would want to turn your message into some-
thing else. We want your message heard.”

Francke also offered his services in planning and logistics.

That led to six days of discussions — not just about routes and security and speaking times
for the protest — but larger conversations about go-go music and police race relations.

By 1 p.m. Sunday, more than 200 people had gathered at Veterans Plaza in downtown Silver
Spring. They marched three blocks to the corner of Colesville Road and Georgia Avenue,
halted, and waited for Turner to lead everyone to one knee.

He swayed back and forth, his head buried in a towel weeping as he thought of Floyd’s
family. Francke stood next to him clapping. Next, a quick prayer. Then the kneel.

The crowd erupted with applause at the 2 minute 53 seconds mark as the group marched
back to Veterans Plaza.

A series of speakers addressed the crowd, some going on so long it started to thin out in the
midday sun. About 3:30 p.m., Turner handed the microphone to Francke.

The commander told the crowd about Turner’s encounter with the police 18 years earlier.
And then the captain turned toward him.

“T’m sorry,” Francke said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200609/page/1/textview 3/3
