2020. 6. 17. Hong Kong protesters decry Beijing's power play

Hong Kong protesters decry Beijing’s power play

Police fitre tear gas, arrest at least 180 as demonstrators push back on
China control

The Dallas Morning News - 25 May 2020 - 1A - By SHIBANI MAHTANI

Police fired tear gas, used a water cannon to disperse protesters and arrested more than
100 people opposed to Beijing’s plan to impose a sweeping national security law.

_—_—— ————

    

HONG KONG — Police fired multiple rounds of tear gas, used a water cannon to disperse
protesters and arrested more than 100 people opposed to Beijing’s plan to impose a
sweeping national security law, in a return to the demonstrations that defined this city last
year.

Despite social distancing measures still in place over the coronavirus outbreak that pro-
hibit gatherings of more than eight and laws on illegal assembly, tens of thousands of peo-
ple thronged by early afternoon through Hong Kong’s Causeway Bay shopping district.
Calls to assemble were made online, without a formal organizer or permit.

Refrains of last year’s protests — “Fight for freedom,” “Stand with Hong Kong” — echoed
on the streets among people of all ages, along with some newer ones: “Hong Kong inde-
pendence, the only way out.” Some carried posters declaring, “Heaven will destroy the
Chinese Communist Party.”

“If we don’t come out today to fight back, this may be the last time,” said Chris, a 19year-
old protester who gave only his first name as he had been arrested for participating in an
illegal protest. “Maybe tomorrow, Hong Kong will be China and we can’t even say a single
word of criticism on the internet without being arrested.”

Some activists gathered near the starting point of the planned march under the auspices of
a “health talk,” claiming they were exempt from restrictions on public gathering, but they
were arrested nonetheless for unauthorized assembly.

Soon, the protest descended into familiar scenes: bottles thrown at police, rounds of tear
gas fired in response, games of cat and mouse between protesters and officers, and even-
tually arrests. By Sunday night, police said they had arrested at least 180, mostly on
charges of unlawful assembly.

The new national security law will criminalize “foreign interference,” secessionist activi-
ties and subversion of state power. Beijing plans to impose it by decree, bypassing the leg-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200525/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Hong Kong protesters decry Beijing's power play

islative processes set up in Hong Kong by the 1997 handover from Britain.

The move undermines Hong Kong’s constitution, the Basic Law, and essentially discards
the “one country, two systems” approach meant to preserve the city’s autonomy until at
least 2047.

Secretary of State Mike Pompeo has called the law the “death knell” for Hong Kong’s au-
tonomy. National security adviser Robert O’brien said Sunday that a Chinese effort to as-
sert dominance over Hong Kong would draw USS. financial sanctions against both.
Speaking on NBC’S Meet the Press, O’brien predicted that global financial firms and well-
educated residents would flee Hong Kong.

“Tt’s hard to see how Hong Kong can remain the Asian financial center it’s become if China
takes over,” he said.

In Beijing, Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi said Sunday that the national security legis-
lation for Hong Kong was “urgent and imperative” because of the protests that erupted
last year.

“These protests had posed a grave threat to Hong Kong’s prosperity and stability, and to
the practice of ‘one country, two systems,’ ” Wang said at a news conference on the side-
lines of the annual National People’s Congress.

He added that establishing a new legal system and enforcement mechanisms were “a
pressing priority” and China “must get it done without the slightest delay.”

But he characterized the new law as narrowly defined.

“This has no impact on Hong Kong’s high degree of autonomy, the rights and freedoms of
Hong Kong residents, or the legitimate rights and interests of foreign investors in Hong
Kong,” he said.

Just 20 minutes after the designated start time of the march, protesters had spilled onto
the roads, snarling traffic in scenes reminiscent of the months of sometimes violent unrest
last year.

Police moved quickly to disperse them, firing several rounds of tear gas into the crowd,
leaving the elderly coughing and choking and parents rushing to get their children into
malls for safety as the shutters closed on them.

At one point, police fired a water cannon mounted on an armored truck at protesters and
then into the air.

Even after most of the activists scattered, police remained on the streets of downtown,
with some people shouting “communist thugs” at them.

In some cases, protesters attempted to build barricades in the streets to hinder police
movement — a hallmark of last year’s protest — but they failed to hold back police for
long. A heavy riot police presence blocked off dozens of roads and fortified subway sta-
tions, in a show of force across the heart of the city.

Police said the demonstrators were “causing serious obstruction to the road traffic” and so
they used “minimum necessary force” to disperse them.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200525/page/1/textview 2/2
