2020. 6. 18. White House fence has familar feeling in OKC

White House fence has familar feeling in OKC

The Oklahoman « 9 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Ellie Melero Staff writer emelero@oklahoman.com

Protesters in Washington, D.C ., have turned the fence around the White House complex
into a canvas used to display messages and paintings that decry police brutality, promote
the Black Lives Matter movement and honor victims of police killings.

uy 1 We Wit

LE ci i

  
  

 

The fence went up around Lafayette Park on June 1 and now surrounds the majority of the
White House complex. It's meant to provide extra security during the protests, but many
people have incorporated t he f ence i nto t he protests.

People have hung signs on the fence saying “Black lives matter” and “I can't breathe” as
well as paintings of police brutality victims like George Floyd and Breonna Taylor. The al
most 2 - mil e - 1 ong, decorated fence is reminiscent of the one put up around the Alfred P.
Murrah Federal Building after the Oklahoma

City bombing in 1995.

Kari Watkins, executive director of t he Oklahoma City National Memorial & Museum
where a section of that fence remains, said she's not surprised people have decorated the
fence in Washington, D. C. She said it's a way for people to remember, honor and bring at-
tention to places, events or people.

“It's become a behavior of Americans that that's how they respond,” she said.

“They put things on a fence for themselves and for others to see. So it becomes a commu-
nity gathering space where people can leave emotions and thoughts for others to see.”
Fences like the ones in Oklahoma City and Washington, D.C., provide people with a place
for their messages to be heard. Social media works like a virtual fence, Watkins said, in
that it provides a place for people to leave messages or photos for others to see.

“T think it' s part of memory,” she said.

“It's part of making sure that people don' t forget what' s happening, don' t forget the life
of George Floyd, and they don't forget the senselessness of the violence.

“The way they can interact with a fence or a social media platform ... that's how people be-
gin to remember.”

The fence around the White House will remain up until at least Wednesday, a Secret Service
spokesperson said in a statement.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/20200609/page/1/textview 4/1
