2020. 6. 17. Arrests came out of the blue, 3 say

Arrests came out of the blue, 3 say

Dallas police drop charges after News reports on their cases

The Dallas Morning News - 13 Jun 2020 - 1A - By MILES MOFFEIT, HOLLY K. HACKER and DIANNE SOLIS

Lily Godinez, a 20yearold Dallas native who just finished real estate school, was standing
beside her car holding a “Black Lives Matter” sign when police officers tackled her, ac-
cording to her and her cousin. The charge? Riot participation.

 

Yolanda Mcgriff, a 55yearold Dallas businesswoman, honored her teen daughter’s wish to
march for black rights. She ended up separated from her daughter for the night after being
arrested for walking in the street. Police charged her with obstructing a highway.

Megan Nordyke, a 35yearold Dallas lawyer who represents battered women, tried to calm
teenage protesters who

were fuming at police outside City Hall, she said. When tempers grew hotter, she gave up
and sat down. Minutes later, she said, officers detained her. She was charged with riot par-
ticipation.

All three women say they were lawfully demonstrating when they were swept up by police
and jailed on May 30, the first weekend of protests here in the wake of George Floyd’s
death at the hands of a Minneapolis officer. Dallas police initially responded to the growing
unrest, including vandalism and looting, with mass arrests, tear gas and rubber bullets to
control crowds.

After an outcry over aggressive police tactics and calls for police reform, Mayor Eric John-
son and Police Chief U. Reneé Hall made public statements about building public trust.

But until Friday, potential convictions hung over the women, who have no criminal histo-
ries. Six hours after The News published a story online about their experiences, a Dallas
police spokesman told The News the charges against them had been dropped. No details
were provided, and officials said they probably would be unable to provide more informa-
tion until next week.

The News had sought records and answers from police about the women’s cases since June
4. On that day, a spokesman for Hall only issued a statement saying the women were “en-
titled to due process and will have their day in court.” Dallas County District Attorney John
Creuzot also did not comment or respond to The News’ questions about the charges
against them.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 3/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. Arrests came out of the blue, 3 say

“This is great to hear,” Nordyke said after The News informed her and the other women
that the cases had been dismissed. “But I trust the police will do better in the future. This
shows why it’s so important to have a free press to ensure accountability — to allow us to
share our stories and bring the truth to light.”

“T’m happy, but we still need an apology from the city,” Mcgriff said.

Twentyfour people were charged with misdemeanor riot participation during the May 30
weekend. An additional 43 were arrested for obstructing a highway or walking in a road-
way, records show. And police arrested more than 100 people for violating a curfew the city
had imposed for downtown.

In recent days, Dallas police officials have said they are willing to reform many of their
practices, while backing off charges against some protesters. They dismissed cases against
674 protesters arrested June 1 — but not jailed — on the Margaret Hunt Hill Bridge, fol-
lowing criticisms that officers had funneled demonstrators onto the bridge to round them
up.

Other police agencies have dismissed more serious charges, such as rioting. Fort Worth’s
chief, Ed Kraus, announced Monday that, in the spirit of “walking the path of reform,” he
would dismiss rioting charges against dozens of protesters. Elsewhere in the country, in-
cluding in Washington, D.C., California and Ohio, law enforcement officials have done the
same.

Police experts and civil rights advocates had told The News that Dallas authorities should
dismiss such charges against the three women and other protesters. In recent days, dozens
of other cases also have been dropped, police said Friday. But it remained unclear whether
those charges were cleared in tandem with the women’s cases, and police declined to pro-
vide specifics.

Charging protesters with riot offenses has been challenged as unconstitutional since the
civil rights movement of the 1950s and ’60s because, critics say, the innocent can be en-
snared.

Texas law defines a riot as a group of seven or more people creating an “immediate danger
of damage to property or injury to persons”; substantially obstructing police; and
depriving someone of a legal right.

“The problem with the riot participation law is that it is hard to apply to large groups,”
said David Henderson, a Dallas civil rights lawyer. “If you and I are marching with a large
group and marchers at the front of the crowd who we can’t see start trouble, that has
nothing to do with us. Police also have to have probable cause to believe that we knowingly
participated in a riot.”

Andy Chatham, a former state district judge in Dallas County, said the Fort Worth police
chief “did the right thing” in dropping the riot charges because the offense can easily be
used to impede First Amendment rights.

“That’s what they should all do now,” Chatham said, referring to top police officials in
Dallas and across the U.S.

As for the offense of obstructing a highway, Chatham said it is generally applied to people
who use vehicles to block traffic, though it can be used against people on foot who shut
down a road.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 3/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. Arrests came out of the blue, 3 say

In interviews with The News , the three women described their arrests and how they met
one another in jail on May 30.

“It was anightmare,” Mcgriff said. “The three of us, as it turned out, faced the same kind
of police treatment that we turned out to protest.”

‘They didn’t like my sign’

That Saturday afternoon Nordyke, the lawyer, grew worried after hearing flash bangs from
her downtown Dallas apartment. She decided to walk over to monitor the police.

She pulled a board she used for knitting from her pantry, grabbed a Sharpie and scrawled,
“The Eyes of Justice are Watching.” On the other side: “I’m Not The Only Lawyer Here.”
After she walked to City Hall around 3:45 p.m., hundreds of demonstrators had gathered.
Police cars were circling the building with sirens blaring, as if to “put people on notice,”
she said.

Nordyke began walking on a sidewalk along Akard Street, displaying her sign. She followed
the police north along Akard to Young Street.

There, the police presence quickly grew. Teen protesters fumed. Nordyke tried to calm
them and keep them from getting too close to officers, she said.

After a couple of water bottles were thrown near the police, Nordyke decided to move on.
An officer atop an armored vehicle pointed a weapon in her direction, she said, so she im-
mediately sat down on a median. And a few minutes later, she walked to City Hall to sit
down. Her sign rested against her shins.

Then officers in riot gear walked toward her. One motioned for her to move away. Then he
told Nordyke he was arresting her for not following instructions. She told him she could
not hear his instructions because he was wearing a gas mask.

Nordyke stayed calm as officers ziptied her hands.

To Nordyke, the reason for her arrest seemed obvious: “They didn’t like my sign.”

‘I’m not a threat’

Godinez and Mcgriff give similar accounts.

“T was standing up for what I believe in: equality for all everywhere,” Godinez told The
News.

She and her cousin Denise Flores retreated to a lot where Godinez had parked her car. Po-
lice were telling people to leave the area at the same time they were “sending tear gas near
where we had parked,” Godinez said.

After Godinez pulled out her car keys, officers tackled her to the ground face down, she and
her cousin said.

She suffered scrapes on her arms but feels lucky she wasn’t hurt worse.

“T didn’t look like I needed officers to take me down,” Godinez said, adding that she is only
“sSfeetzero. I’m not a threat. I was just holding my sign.”

‘We don’t need to run’

Later that evening, Yolanda Mcgriff and her 16yearold daughter had just attended a gradu-
ation ceremony in Dallas. Her daughter suddenly said she wanted to march, so she pulled
the car over.

“T talked about how we would be basically protesting for George Floyd,” said Mcgriff, a
former Parkland Memorial Hospital medical analyst who now runs an antique shop in

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 3/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. Arrests came out of the blue, 3 say

southern Dallas. “For her, it was about the unfairness of how Africanamericans are being
treated in general.”

They soon found themselves wandering the west side of downtown, following a group of
protesters near Reunion Boulevard and Interstate 35E, they said.

“It was so unorganized,” Mcgriff said. “Everywhere we went the streets were blocked off.

We ended up getting caught up with people who were going into the highway.”

Some protesters started throwing bottles. Police poured in, some firing what appeared to
be rubber bullets. Her daughter, scared, started running away, she said.

“T told her we don’t need to run, we didn’t do anything,” Mcgriff said. “The police sur-
rounded me within seconds.”

An officer told her she was under arrest for being on the freeway and putting her feet on
the ramp. She told him she had not gone into the highway and had not “even touched the
ramp.”

Many other protesters had fled. Moments later, she realized she had lost track of her
daughter. She was terrified.

She later learned a group of “Samaritans” had found her daughter and turned her over to
other family members.

Mcgriff chokes up now. “It’s hard for me to talk about,” she said.

Night in jail

The only solace once the three women were packed into a cell overnight: They could im-
mediately relate to one another’s experiences. Some of the other dozen inmates also
shared familiar accounts.

“They said they were trying to disengage from the chaos and got arrested,” Nordyke said
of the women.

The next day, the three each paid at least $500 bond to be released.

On Friday, the women said they were greatly relieved to hear their cases had been dis-
missed.

But Mcgriff and the others still did not know if their otherwise clean records would be to-
tally cleared.

“Along with an apology, we need our records expunged,” she said.

When The News informed Godinez that her case had been dropped, she said had just bro-
ken the news to her 9yearold sister that she had been arrested.

Her sister said: “That must have been scary. But you didn’t do anything wrong, right?”
“No, I didn’t,” Godinez said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 3/page/1/textview

4i4
