2020. 6. 18. LOOKING AT POSSIBLE THUNDER SCENARIOS

LOOKING AT POSSIBLE THUNDER SCENARIOS

Ideas ranging from practical to radical have been floated for how the NBA
can resume this season

The Oklahoman - 28 May 2020 - A1 - By Joe Mussatto Staff writer jmussatto@oklahoman.com

The NBA is still deciding how to resume the season.

   

And as ESPN' s Adrian Woj na row ski reported Wednesday, “there's no current expecta-
tion for a decision on a finalized return-toplay plan” to emerge Friday when the league's
Board of Governors meet with commissioner Adam Silver.

That hasn't slowed a stream of suggestions, ranging from all 30 teams returning to action
to a World Cup format. While t he when a nd how of returning are unknown, Disney World
in Orlando, Florida, is the likely answer to where.

Here's a rundown of several return-to-play possi bilities, and how they affect the Thun-
der:

Resuming the regular season

If the NBA is to create a bubble environment to protect players, coaches and staff from the
coronavirus, a greater number of teams equals a greater risk.

Wojnarowski reported Tuesday that the idea of 30

teams playing in Orlando “has lost momentum, but it still has a significant lobby.”

The NBA and National Basketball Players Association have discussed a model of all teams
returning to meet a target of 72 regularseason games, according to Wojnarowski.

The Thunder (40-24) would play eight more regular-season games under that format.
Straight to normal playoffs

The No. 5 seed Thunder would play the No. 4 seed Jazz in the first round, and a traditional
playoff structure would be preserved.

But freezing the current standings and proceeding to the playoffs creates a problem. Not
all teams have played the same number of games. And some teams had more manageable
schedules down the stretch than others, which could have impacted playoff races.

For example, New Orleans (28-36) is 31/2 games behind Memphis (32-33) for the No .8
seed in the West, but the Pelicans had a much easier remaining schedule.

Analytics site Five Thirty Eight gave New Orleans (60%) a significantly better chance to
make the playoffs than Memphis (15%).

Reseed the playoffs

This, like the above scenario, would take the top eight teams from the West and the top
eight teams from the East. But instead of traditional conference clash es, teams would be

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/20200528/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. LOOKING AT POSSIBLE THUNDER SCENARIOS

reseeded from No. 1 to 16.

The Thunder, as a No. 9 seed, would face the No .8 seed Heat in the first round. The winner
of that matchup would likely play the No. 1 seed Bucks, which would be matched up with
the No. 16 seed Magic in the first round.

Group stage

Perhaps the most radical change, but also one that seems to be gaining traction. The
Ringer' s Kevin O'Connor reported that the World Cup-style format is one of the proposals
that was sent to Silver.

A group stage, consisting of the top 20 teams, would replace the first round of the playoffs.
There would be four groups of five teams, and each team would play two games against
each opponent in their group, as O'Connor outlined.

The two teams with the best records in each group —for a total of eight teams — would
advance to the second round of the playoffs. Then traditional seven-game series would re-
sume.

This format would include the 16 current playoff teams, along with the next four teams
with t he best records: Trail Blazers, Pelicans, Kings and Spurs.

Tiers would t hen be divided to ensure a competitive balance. For example, the top four
teams — Bucks, Lakers, Rap tor sand Clippers — would comprise Tier 1. They would all be
at the top of their separate groups.

Using this format, The Oklahoman conducted a sample draw.

Group 1: Raptors, Nuggets, Thunder, Grizzlies, Pelicans

Group 2: Bucks, Celtics, Pacers, Mavericks, Spurs

Group 3: Clippers, Heat, Rockets, Magic, Kings

Group 4: Lakers, Jazz, 76ers, Nets, Trail Blazers

There's not an obvious “Group of Death,” to use a soccer term.

Getting the Raptors instead of the Bucks, Clippers and Lake rs is a lucky draw for the
Thunder, but the Pelicans are the most dangerous Tier 5 team.

Cuban's plan

Mavericks owner Mark Cuban suggested a plan for all 30 teams to return and play five to
seven regular- season games, he told ESPN.

According to the report, Cuban consider sit‘“‘a must” for all team store turn given the
money tied into television contracts.

Cuban proposed that the top- 10 teams from both conferences would make the playoffs
and be reseeded based on record. Then there would be two play-in matchups — No. 17 vs.
No. 20 and No. 18 vs. No. 19 t hat would advance to play the No. 15 and No. 16 seeds for the
final spots, Cuban told ESPN.

Every team except t he Timberwolves and Warriors would have a chance to make the play-
offs under Cuban's proposal.

Similar play-in tournaments have been suggested to give teams currently outside the
playoffs a chance to qualify for the postseason.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/20200528/page/1/textview 2/2
