2020. 6. 17. Trump’s baseless claim persists

Trump’s baseless claim persists

PUSHES THEORY THAT CRITIC KILLED WOMAN Pressure grows on tech
firms over his falsehoods

The Washington Post : 27 May 2020 - A1 - BY TOLUSE OLORUNNIPA, ELIZABETH DWOSKIN AND JOHN WAGNER

President Trump and the White House on Tuesday continued to promote a baseless con-

spiracy theory about a woman’s 2001 death, ignoring her grieving widower’s plea for peace
and putting renewed pressure on social media companies about the president’s toxic use of
their platforms.

   

=“

PPP er

Tye

Twitter issued a public apology to the family of Lori Klausutis, whose death Trump has re-
peatedly weaponized to attack MSNBC host Joe Scarborough. But the social media company
rejected a request from her widower, Timothy J. Klausutis, to delete Trump’s conspiracy-
laden tweets accusing Scarborough of a debunked murder plot, saying his wife “deserves
better.”

“We are deeply sorry about the pain these statements, and the attention they are drawing,
are causing the family,” Twitter said in a statement Tuesday. “We've been working to ex-
pand existing product features and policies so we can more effectively address things like
this going forward, and we hope to have those changes in place shortly.”

Later Tuesday, Twitter for the first time added labels to two Trump tweets that included
misinformation about voter fraud, directing the president’s 80 million followers to “Get
the facts” about the president’s false claims. The company did not take similar action
against Trump’s tweets about Klausutis’s

death.

Tuesday’s events reflected the pressure on Twitter and other social media companies to
take responsibility for the false and misleading content they allow users to publish — a
politically dicey proposition when one of the most prominent purveyors of such material is
the president of the United States. Twitter, in resisting Klausutis’s request and doing
nothing about the president’s tweets about the death of his wife, effectively signaled it was
not applying the same standards to Trump that it does to average users — even as it puts a
fact-checking label on his tweets, the first time the company has done so for a world
leader.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200527/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. Trump’s baseless claim persists

Trump lashed out about the fact-checks Tuesday evening on Twitter, accusing the com-
pany of stifling free speech and interfering in the upcoming presidential election.

Trump and his allies often complain that social media companies have an anti-conserva-
tive bias, putting political pressure on tech giants that are already facing scrutiny in Wash-
ington in areas such as antitrust.

Trump threatened earlier this month to take unspecified actions against tech companies,
claiming without evidence that they are breaking the law.

“The Radical Left is in total command & control of Facebook, Instagram, Twitter and
Google,” Trump tweeted on May 16. “The Administration is working to remedy this illegal
situation. Stay tuned, and send names & events.”

Neither Trump nor his aides expressed remorse Tuesday about the president dragging
Klausutis into his feud with Scarborough, despite her husband’s plea.

“T’m asking you to intervene in this instance because the President of the United States has
taken something that does not belong him — the memory of my dead wife and perverted it
for perceived political gain,” Timothy Klausutis wrote last week in a letter to Twitter chief
executive Jack Dorsey. “My wife deserves better.”

Former vice president Joe Biden, the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee, said
Twitter should take down Trump’s tweets.

“When things are patently not true they should say so,” he said during an interview with
CNN.

Republican lawmakers largely remained silent.

Trump continued pushing the debunked murder charge, and the White House press secre-
tary and the Trump campaign joined the fray Tuesday to amplify the allegation. Online,
Trump supporters set themselves on a mission to defend the president and validate his ac-
cusation.

“It’s certainly a very suspicious situation, very sad, very sad and very suspicious,” Trump
told reporters at a White House event Tuesday. “And I hope somebody gets to the bottom
of it, it would be a very good thing. As you know, there’s no statute of limitations. So it
would be a very good thing to do.”

Scarborough, a former congressman, is one of dozens of critics Trump has taken to Twitter
to accuse of crimes. Trump’s online stream of baseless allegations, misinformation and
pseudoscience has intensified in recent weeks as the coronavirus pandemic death count
has risen, sparking renewed calls for social media platforms to take action.

While the president’s accusations can be seen an attempt to distract from the Trump ad-
ministration’s handling of the pandemic, they also misuse the presidential bully pulpit at a
time when it is sorely needed for public safety, said Max Skidmore, a political science pro-
fessor at the University of Missouri at Kansas City and the author of a book on presidential
responses to pandemics.

“He has no concern of whether what he’s saying true — only whether it works” politically,
he said. “It’s outrageous.”

Social media platforms have grappled with how to handle Trump’s incendiary approach to
public discourse.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200527/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. Trump’s baseless claim persists

On many occasions, Trump’s posts appeared to have crossed the line of social media com-
pany policies, but the companies have largely steered clear of censoring his commentary.
Decisions to leave up Trump’s comments have sparked criticism that the firms are coming
up with arbitrary policies on the fly.

Twitter, Facebook, and YouTube have long held posts from world leaders to a different
standard because they considered them “newsworthy.” That socalled “newsworthiness
exemption” — in which the company allows content by public figures that break its poli-
cies to stay online — has repeatedly come under fire during the Trump presidency.

In 2018, Dorsey said he was reconsidering Twitter’s exception for political figures, ac-
knowledging that the speech of powerful people can sometimes cause greater harm than
everyday citizens and that perhaps they should be held to a higher standard rather than a
lower one.

Last year, The Washington Post first reported that Twitter planned to start labeling tweets
from world leaders that violate its policies but that remain on its site because of their news
value.

The company unveiled its first such warning labels on Trump’s tweets on Tuesday, adding
factchecks to two of his posts alleging widespread voter fraud.

During the pandemic, Twitter and other technology companies have said they will act
more aggressively than ever before to combat misinformation. Twitter revised its terms of
service to say that it would remove posts by anyone, even world leaders, if such posts went
“against guidance from authoritative sources of global and public health information.”
For the first time, Twitter removed tweets by Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro and
Venezuelan President Nicolas Maduro, arguing that their March comments about breaking
social distancing orders and touting false cures had such potential for harm that they war-
ranted action beyond labeling. The shift marked a significant reversal for a company that
had previously taken a hands-off approach to misinformation.

In May, Twitter rolled out a new policy saying that it would label or provide warning mes-
sages about coronavirus-related misinformation, even when that information did not a
directly contradict health authorities or Twitter’s own policies. The company said it may
expand the labels to other issue areas, such as other types of health-related hoaxes or
other situations where there is a risk of harm. Tuesday’s move to label Trump’s tweets was
the first extension of that policy.

Throughout the day Tuesday, Twitter executives debated whether to apply its label to
Trump’s statements about the widower’s wife, and if so, how to classify the statement un-
der the companies’ current policies, according to a person familiar with the discussions
who spoke on the condition of anonymity to describe the private deliberations. They de-
bated whether the tweet constituted misinformation that has the potential to cause harm,
or is a form of harassment, said the person, who was not authorized to speak publicly
about ongoing deliberations.

On Tuesday morning, Trump went on Twitter again to advocate the “opening of a Cold
Case against Psycho Joe Scarborough,” which he said was “not a Donald Trump original
thought.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200527/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. Trump’s baseless claim persists

“So many unanswered & obvious questions, but I won’t bring them up now!” Trump
added. “Law enforcement eventually will?”

With no evidence, Trump has continued to push a conspiracy theory that Scarborough,
while a member of Congress, had an affair with his married staffer and that he may have
killed her — a theory that has been debunked by news organizations including The Wash-
ington Post.

Authorities determined that Lori Klausutis suffered an abnormal heart rhythm and died
after collapsing and striking her head. She was discovered in Scarborough’s office in Fort
Walton Beach, on her back with her head near a desk, according to a 2001 police report.
Trump has also alleged Scarborough decided to retire after her death despite publicly an-
nouncing his decision almost two months earlier.

In his letter to Dorsey, which was first reported in an opinion piece in the New York Times,
Timothy Klausutis argued that Trump’s tweets violate Twitter’s community rules and
terms of service.

“An ordinary user like me would be banished from the platform for such a tweet but I am
only asking that these tweets be removed,” he wrote.

Scarborough, who was 900 miles away in Washington on the day Klausutis died, and his
MSNEC co-host and wife, Mika Brzezinski, have both expressed outrage on the air in re-
cent days — saying that Trump’s false accusations were most hurtful to Klausutis’s family.
Brzezinski called Trump a “cruel, sick, disgusting person” and said he was using the
episode to distract from the coronavirus pandemic.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200527/page/1/textview 4/4
