2020. 6. 17. Philippines: Family of doctors feels the effects of the pandemic.

Philippines: Family of doctors feels the effects of the pan-
demic.

No end in sight in nation’s crisis as lockdown becomes one of world’s long-
est

The Washington Post - 30 May 2020 - A1 - BY REGINE CABATO regine.cabato@washpost.com

manila — Scrubs. Shoe covers. Suit. Gloves. N95 mask. Goggles. Face cap. Face shield.
Gown.

ENTHARICE

teem yD

 

Theodore Joseph Ablaza, 28, starts another grueling shift attending to young patients in a
covid-19 ward in Manila. Although the public hospital is air-conditioned, all the gear
makes conditions oppressive.

“T always joke to people that it feels like being an astronaut,” said Ablaza, who goes by TJ,
a pediatric resident at Philippine General Hospital. “But in reality, it feels like being ina
sauna.”

Medicine runs in TJ’S family, and their lives, like countless others, have been transformed
by the pandemic. Across town, his parents Ted, 60, and Mita, 62, both pediatricians, meet
children and their parents at a private maternity hospital in Tondo, one of Manila’s poor-
est communities. The couple also has two daughters, Nadine, an economics student, and
Tin, who runs a small business.

There is no end in sight for the pandemic in the Philippines, which in mid-march insti-
tuted a lockdown that is now among the world’s longest. With more than 16,000 cases and
900 deaths, the country has suffered one of the most extensive outbreaks in Southeast
Asia. Officials have faced criticism for not conducting enough tests, but a spokesman for
President Rodrigo Duterte said Monday that authorities are expanding testing capacity.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200530/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Philippines: Family of doctors feels the effects of the pandemic.

TJ’S parents’ workplace, Amisola Maternity Hospital, is not a covid-19 facility, but pa-
tients still show up for common concerns, including colds, coughs and fevers — poten-
tially symptoms of the novel coronavirus.

“We have to take it as part of the occupational hazard of the profession,” Ted said.

As physicians, they have no choice but to report for duty, his wife adds. “If we don’t go to
work, then there will be no pediatric doctors here.”

The health system is severely understaffed, with roughly one doctor for every 33,000 pa-
tients, according to the Philippines’ Department of Health. Some 35 health workers have
died of covid-19, the disease caused by the coronavirus, and more than 2,000 have con-
tracted the illness, the World Health Organization has reported. Medical workers face
shortages of personal protective equipment and a lack of transportation during the lock-
down.

Philippine General Hospital, which serves many of Manila’s urban poor, allows its staff to
take a mid-shift break before returning to work with a new suit. But many doctors, includ-
ing TJ, choose to stick out their duty without bathroom or food breaks, careful to conserve
the gear they have.

“T guess it’s just part of the sacrifice, just a little bit compared to what these patients are
experiencing,” TJ said.

As they monitor each patient’s progress, TJ and his colleagues confer with consultants on
the next course of action. This could include blood extractions or intubation.

While he battles to save others, the virus has hit close to home for TJ, too.

His uncle Gene — a lawyer who was healthy and active — fell ill after coming into contact
with an infected colleague who was asymptomatic. The last time his family saw him, he
was hooked to an oxygen tank; the next thing, they were informed he was dead.

“Tf you recall him, he was really lively,” TJ said. “It just really shows that no one [is]
spared of this condition.”

Heart-wrenching events play out in the covid ward. In normal times, parents would ac-
company their children — but the contagion risk means sick children have to be isolated.
One mother called the ward at 11 p.m., TJ said, begging the doctors to let her speak on the
phone to her teenage son, who was in isolation.

Then there are the victims the doctors know — those who aren’t patients. TJ said a friend
had lost his father to the disease. Another person he knew lost both his parents a week
apart.

“The next patient could be me,” he said. “Hopefully not, but that’s the fear that we en-
counter every time we go on duty.”

TJ’S parents have felt fear, too, in the wake of Gene’s death — but they have decided to
knuckle down to work. With public gatherings banned and tight restrictions on funerals,
they couldn’t say a proper goodbye.

Mita said their work has become even more urgent as some hospitals that normally offer
specialist care have become covid-19 facilities, pushing patients with conditions unrelated
to the virus toward local clinics.

“T look at it as an opportunity to show what we’ve got, to be able to help our fellow men in
the best way we can,” Ted said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200530/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Philippines: Family of doctors feels the effects of the pandemic.

“This is what we signed up for,” TJ said. “It’s our oath to put the lives of these people
ahead of us.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200530/page/1/textview 3/3
