2020. 6. 17. Crowds call for better future

Crowds call for better future

Protesters pray, remember Botham Jean on 10th day of Dallas demonstra-
tions

The Dallas Morning News - 8 Jun 2020 - 1A - By HOLLY K. HACKER, LAVENDRICK SMITH and DANA BRANHAM Staff
Writers

Dr. Tonya Mcdonald says the fact that protests are continuing in Dallas gives her hope they
may not be needed anymore someday.

"aay

eI i lal

     
      

bs
Pa
¥
ea)
A

=.
Gf i
| aviv & -
: , ; lee
7)
Se ys eae
2 a el

4)

&

a ? J ry 7

“‘We’re on day 10 and it doesn’t look like it’s going to stop anytime soon, with people
speaking and rallying,” the 47yearold said Sunday. “It shows that this time the potential
for it to be different, really lifechangingly different, is truly there.”

If the demonstrations work maybe America can overcome racism, she said.

‘What I’m hoping to see is that the children I’m taking care of today as a pediatrician, 20
years from now will not be having to do these marches,” said Mcdonald, who was among
at least 150 people who attended a prayer vigil outside the Frank Crowley Courts Building
just west of downtown.

Mcdonald, who is black, grew up hearing her parents’ accounts of the racism in Beaumont
and Houston in the 1960s. Blacks could attend the South Texas State Fair only on a certain
day. Her mom couldn’t learn to swim because her family lived near the white pool, and the
one for blacks was miles away.

Her parents protested then. Now, she said, it’s her turn.

Less than a mile and a half away, others were doing their part, too, to keep the peaceful
protests going Sunday.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200608/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Crowds call for better future

Demonstrators who gathered at police headquarters in the Cedars to march into downtown
paused in silence at South Side Flats, the apartment complex where 26yearold Botham
Jean was murdered in 2018 by offduty Officer Amber Guyger.

The crowd knelt at length, in acknowledgment of the nearly nine minutes a Minneapolis
police officer knelt on George Floyd’s neck as he lay handcuffed facedown on the street. It
was Floyd’s death that stirred the protests across North Texas and the nation.

At the vigil at the Frank Crowley

courthouse, 28yearold Elshaday Aredo of Dallas said she saw signs of change in the Floyd
case.

‘‘We’ve seen that the protests have worked,” she said, noting that three more officers had
been charged in connection with his death since they began.

Chokehold ban

On Friday, Dallas leaders announced they would formally ban chokeholds and any force in-
tended to restrict a person’s airway, implement a policy to warn before shooting, and cre-
ate guidelines to release body cam and dashcam video of critical incidents. The Police
Department also said it had instituted a policy requiring officers to intervene in any situa-
tion when force is applied inappropriately or is no longer required.

But Aredo said she’d like to see more changes in local policies, including ensuring inde-
pendent, outside investigations of allegations of police misconduct.

When an airline’s plane crashes, the outside National Transportation Safety Board investi-
gates, she noted.

“Tf we do it for planes, what about people?”

At another rally, in Fair Park, Dallas City Council member Adam Bazaldua said real reform
would depend on “reimagining public safety.”

As most of Minneapolis’ city council members vowed Sunday to support disbanding their
city’s police department, Bazaldua announced he wouldn’t vote on a budget for Dallas that
doesn’t divest from the police department and reallocate money to address racial in-
equities.

‘Change the culture’

“Divesting in the police department does not mean that it’s specific to personnel,” he said.
“T’m not saying I want to take police off of the streets. I’m saying that I want to change the
culture and what we prioritize in funding and how policing looks.”

Bazaldua, who represents South

Dallas, said it was important to him to organize the rally, which began as a march from
Deep Ellum, so protesters would know their voices were being heard. Too often, he said,
people in positions of power have been absent from protests.

“The missing piece is the people who are actually making the decisions to make that
change,” he said. “If we’re not going to be out here with them and showing unity, and giv-
ing them a platform so that they know that their voice is not going in vain, I think it’s an
injustice.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200608/page/1/textview 2/2
