2020. 6. 17. Unrest:

Unrest:
U.S. military leaders told to keep quiet on Floyd death.

The Washington Post : 3 Jun 2020 - A1 - BY DAN LAMOTHE dan.lamothe@washpost.com

A week after the killing of George Floyd, the Air Force’s top enlisted member took to Twit-
ter to say that he too is a black man, “who happens to be Chief Master Sergeant of the Air
Force,” and could die the same way.

“T am George Floyd . .. 1am Philando Castile, Iam Michael Brown, I am Alton Sterling, I
am Tamir Rice,” wrote Kaleth O. Wright, naming other black Americans killed by police.
“Just like most of the Black Airmen and so many others in our ranks ... 1 am outraged at
watching another Black man die on television before our very eyes.”

The response on Monday evening went viral, with veterans and service members alike
commenting on its rawness and candor. But it also was cast into stark relief as most senior
military officials remained silent on Floyd’s death in police custody in Minneapolis after
being handcuffed and the nationwide protests that have followed.

At least twice in the past week, senior Trump administration officials in the Defense
Department directed service chiefs to keep quiet on the issue, even though some expressed
an interest in responding to a painful moment in the nation, said three defense officials
with familiarity with the discussion.

The officials, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because of the sensitivity of the is-
sue, said

Defense Secretary Mark T. Esper wanted to address the issue first. However, he did not do
so until Tuesday night, more than a week later.

“1, like you, am steadfast in my belief that Americans who are frustrated, angry, and seek-
ing to be heard must be ensured that opportunity,” Esper wrote ina memo to U.S. troops.
“And like you, I am committed to upholding the rule of law and protecting life and liberty,
so the violent actions of a few do not undermine the rights and freedoms of law-abiding
citizens.”

Esper asked service members to “stay apolitical in these turbulent days” — a theme he has
stressed since becoming defense secretary. A senior defense official said before Esper’s
memo was released that the Pentagon was considering how to address the issue.

“T think there is a question about how and when, and at what level, the department should
weigh into what has become a highly charged emotional and political issue,” the senior of-
ficial said.

The directive to the service chiefs to remain quiet came as President Trump increasingly
reaches for the military as a tool of choice to quell unrest as its commander in chief and
calls people involved in rioting “thugs.”

The Pentagon is also wrestling with questions about its own insensitivity, including a de-
sire to keep numerous Army bases across southern states named after Confederate gener-
als.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200603/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Unrest:

On Tuesday night, the Trump administration again dispatched National Guard troops
across Washington to complement police. The military forces participated in the operation
after law enforcement authorities deployed pepper spray and other nonlethal weapons
against protesters outside the White House, and National Guard helicopters hovered in nu-
merous locations at rooftop level, in an apparent attempt to disperse crowds with sus-
tained, gusty rotor wash.

Wright’s series of tweets was posted shortly before authorities began dispersing crowds in
Washington on Monday and Trump announced he was expanding the military’s role in the
response. Wright first told the service’s top officer, Gen. David L. Goldfein, what he wanted
to do, and Goldfein supported it, one defense official said.

The general also released a memo to commanders internally on Monday calling Floyd's
death a “national tragedy” and stating that “every American should be outraged” by the
police conduct demonstrated in the case.

Goldfein wrote that while “we all wish it were not possible for racism to occur in America,”
commanders need to confront it, according to the memo, a copy of which was obtained by
The Washington Post.

The Navy’s top enlisted sailor,

Russell Smith, also addressed the unrest, writing in a message online that “the tragic
headlines and subsequent turbulent events” affect “every citizen of our great Nation.”

A handful of other generals also have addressed the unrest, including Lt. Gen. James Slife,
the commander of Air Force Special Operations Command.

“I’m bothered by the events in Minneapolis and what it means about our society,” Slife
wrote in a Facebook post on Friday. “And our Air Force is a reflection of our society, so, by
extension, this is an Air Force issue. We’d be naive to think issues of institutional racism
and unconscious bias don’t affect us. We can’t ignore it. We have to face it. And to face it,
we have to talk about it.”

But the chiefs mostly had not. Asked why on Monday night, military officials either de-
clined to comment or referred questions to the defense secretary’s office.

In a video released Tuesday night, Goldfein and Wright discuss the unrest, with Wright
saying he worries whether he will be safe if he is pulled over by police and Goldfein sharing
that he realized he “probably doesn’t completely understand.”

“T’ve been really outraged for not just the last week,” Wright said. “It drew up a lot of rage
and a lot of anger from the past because I’ve just watched this over and over and over
again.”

The posture stood in contrast to 2017, when each of the chiefs condemned violence and
racism that was on display by white supremacists at a rally in Charlottesville while the
Pentagon was run by former defense secretary Jim Mattis.

The Pentagon has struggled to reflect America’s diversity at its highest levels. While 43
percent of the military’s 1.3 million active-duty members are people of color, only two of
the about 40 four-star officers are black.

Eric Flowers, a recently retired Army colonel, said that when the Pentagon doesn’t express
outrage over something like the manner in which Floyd died, there “kind of is an unspoken
message” to potential service members of color that they are not recognized.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200603/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Unrest:

“We miss an opportunity by not providing some type of solidarity through comments,”
said Flowers, who is black. “We miss an opportunity when we do not reassert that this is
not the America that we are asking people to fight for and support.”

Dana Pittard, a retired twostar Army general, said he doesn’t believe that the service chiefs
will follow any unlawful orders in the response to the unrest. But he said he is not sur-
prised to hear about political concerns among Defense Department appointees.

“T hate to use the term ultraloyalist, but they’re appointees,” said Pittard, who is black.
“They’re not going to stray very far from the president.”

Pittard said he wishes that Gen. Mark A. Milley, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, had
not participated in a photo opportunity Monday in which Trump visited St. John’s Episco-
pal Church, which is near the White House, after police dispersed the crowd with rubber
bullets and other weapons. Milley, dressed in his camouflage uniform, and Esper were
among the officials who walked with the president to the house of worship, which has been
partially burned during protests.

“It was just a bad optic for the military to be there at all,” Pittard said.

Esper and Milley went with Trump to the church believing that they were going to see
some of their troops, said a senior defense official, speaking on the condition of
anonymity. They did so afterward.

Kyle Bibby, a former Marine captain, said he has been disappointed by the silence of senior
military officials after Floyd’s death, especially in light of reports of white nationalism in
the military.

“Condemning racism and police brutality is not really a partisan issue, right?” said Bibby,
who is black and now works on socialjustice issues for Common Defense, a progressive
veterans group.

“The generals and admirals, they can’t put their heads in the sand,” he said. “They’re
leaders, and they’re responsible for one of the most important institutions in this coun-

try.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200603/page/1/textview 3/3
