2020. 6. 17. Cities taking action BLACK LIVES MATTER PROTESTS

Cities taking action BLACK LIVES MATTER PROTESTS
Atlanta chief resigns after officer kills black man

The Dallas Morning News - 14 Jun 2020 - 1A: By RUSS BYNUM

ATLANTA — Atlanta’s police chief resigned Saturday hours after a black man was fatally
shot by an officer in a struggle following a field sobriety test. Authorities said the slain man
had grabbed an officer’s Taser but was running away when he was shot.

Sr Ve

 
    

    

Atlanta Mayor Keisha Lance Bottoms announced the resignation of Police Chief Erika
Shields as roughly 150 protesters marched outside the

Wendy’s restaurant where 27yearold Rayshard Brooks was fatally shot late Friday. The
mayor also called for the immediate firing of the officer who opened fire at Brooks.

“T do not believe that this was a justified use of deadly force and have called for the imme-
diate termination of the officer,” Bottoms said.

She said that it was Shields’ decision to step aside as police chief and that she would re
main with the city in an undetermined role. Interim corrections chief Rodney Bryant will
serve as interim police chief until a permanent replacement is found.

The Georgia Bureau of Investigation, which is investigating the shooting, said the deadly
confrontation started with officers responding to a complaint that a man was sleeping ina
car blocking the restaurant’s drivethrough lane. The bureau said Brooks failed a field so-
briety test and then resisted officers’ attempts to arrest him.

The bureau released security camera video of the shooting Saturday. The footage shows a
man running from two police officers as he raises a hand, which is holding some type of
object, toward an officer a few steps behind him. The officer draws his gun and fires as the
man keeps running, then falls to the ground in the parking lot.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 4/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Cities taking action BLACK LIVES MATTER PROTESTS

Bureau Director Vic Reynolds said Brooks had grabbed a Taser from one of the officers and
appeared to point it at the officer as he fled, prompting the officer to reach for his gun.

“In a circumstance like this where an officer is involved in the use of deadly force, the pub-
lic has a right to know what happened,” Reynolds told a news conference.

The security camera video does not show Brooks’ initial struggle with police.

Protesters gather

The shooting came at a time of heightened tension over police brutality and calls for re-
forms across the United States following the May 25 death of George Floyd in Minneapolis.
Atlanta was among the U.S. cities where large crowds of protesters took to the streets.

A crowd of about 150 demonstrators, including members of Brooks’ family, gathered
Saturday outside the restaurant where he was shot. Police shut down streets for several
blocks around the restaurant as protesters marched peacefully in the streets.

Among them was Crystal Brooks, who said she is Rayshard Brooks’ sisterinlaw.

“He wasn’t causing anyone any harm,” she said. “The police went up to the car and even
though the car was parked they pulled him out of the car and started tussling with him.”
She added, “He did grab the Taser, but he just grabbed the Taser and ran.”

Shields, Atlanta’s police chief for less than four years, was initially praised in the days fol-
lowing Floyd’s death last month. She said the Minnesota officers involved should go to
prison and walked into crowds of protesters in downtown Atlanta, telling demonstrators
she understood their frustrations and fears.

Days later, Shields fired two officers and benched three others who were caught on video
May 30 in a hostile confrontation with two college students whose car was stuck in traffic
caused by the protests. The officers shouted at the pair, fired Tasers at them and dragged
them from the vehicle. When prosecutors charged six officers with crimes in the incident,
however, Shields openly questioned the timing and appropriateness of the charges.

The shooting of Brooks two weeks later raised further questions about the Atlanta depart-
ment.

‘People are upset’

Gerald Griggs, an attorney and a vice president of Atlanta’s NAACP chapter, walked with
the protesters Saturday afternoon. “The people are upset,” he said. “They want to know
why their dear brother

Rayshard Brooks was shot and killed when he was merely asleep on the passenger side and
not doing anything.”

Even though Brooks struggled with officers, Griggs said, “they could have used nonlethal
force to take him down.”

Atlanta Deputy Police Chief Timothy Peek said late Friday that both officers deployed their
Tasers in an attempt to subdue the suspect but were unable to “stop the aggression of the
fight.”

Reynolds, of the Georgia Bureau of Investigation, said his agents worked through the night
interviewing witnesses and reviewing video. He said their findings show that Brooks tried
to fight off two officers when they tried to arrest him and at one point managed to take a
Taser away from one of them.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200614/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Cities taking action BLACK LIVES MATTER PROTESTS

A security camera recorded Brooks “running or fleeing from Atlanta police officers,”
Reynolds said. “It appears that he has in his hand a Taser.”

Brooks “turns around and it appears at that time he points a Taser at an Atlanta officer,”
Reynolds said. That’s when the officer drew his gun and shot Brooks, he said, estimating
that the officer fired three times.

Reynolds said his agents will turn over results of their investigation to Fulton County
District Attorney Paul Howard, whose office will decide whether criminal charges are war-
ranted against the officers.

Howard said Saturday his office had already gotten involved.

“My office has already launched an intense, independent investigation of the incident,”
Howard said in a statement, saying members of his staff “were on scene shortly after the
shooting, and we have been in investigative sessions ever since to identify all of the facts
and circumstances surrounding this incident.”

Stacey Abrams, the Georgia Democrat who gained national prominence running for gover-
nor in 2018, said Saturday on Twitter that “sleeping in a drivethru must not end in death.”
“The killing of #RayshardBrooks in Atlanta last night demands we severely restrict the use
of deadly force,” Abrams said. “Yes, investigations must be called for — but so too should
accountability.”

The officers involved in the shooting were not identified.

Brooks died after being taken to an Atlanta hospital. One of the officers was treated and re-
leased for unspecified injuries.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200614/page/1/textview 3/3
