2020. 6. 17. Fires that survive the winter

Fires that survive the winter
Warming winters may mean some of last year’s blazes never went out

The Dallas Morning News - 29 May 2020 - 1A - By ANDREW FREEDMAN

The bitterly cold winter typically snuffs out the seasonal wildfires that erupt in the Arctic.
But every once in a while, a “zombie fire” comes along that refuses to die.

 

The bitterly cold winter typically snuffs out the seasonal wildfires that erupt in the Arctic.
But every once in a while, a wildfire comes along that refuses to die.

These “zombie fires” can burrow into the rich organic material beneath the surface, such
as the vast peatlands that ring the Arctic, and smolder under the snowpack throughout the
frigid winter.

With the Siberian Arctic seeing record warm conditions in recent weeks and months, sci-
entists monitoring Arctic wildfire trends are becoming more convinced that some of the
blazes erupting in the Arctic this spring are actually left over from last summer.

Last year brought a record surge in fires to a region that is warming at more than twice the
rate of the rest of the world. The Arctic contains vast stores of carbon and other planet-
warming greenhouse gases in its soils, in peat and in frozen soil known as permafrost, that
can be freed through combustion. Peatlands are wetlands that contain ancient decomposed
and partly decomposed organic matter.

According to Mark Parrington, senior scientist and wildfire expert at the European Union’s
Copernicus Atmosphere Monitoring Service, recent Arctic fire detections have come in ar-
eas where fires were burning last summer, which lines up with regions affected by warmer
than average and unusually dry surface conditions.

“We know ... that the Arctic Circle regions most affected by fires in 2019 were experiencing
warmer and drier surface conditions, providing the ideal environment for fires to burn and
persist,” Parrington said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200529/page/1/textview 4/1
