2020. 6. 17. Rangers pick ‘fiery’ infielder Foscue in 1st round

Rangers pick ‘fiLlery’ infielder Foscue in 1st round
Miss. State 2B comes as surprise selection, but attitude’s a winner

The Dallas Morning News - 11 Jun 2020: 1A: Twitter: @Evan_p_grant

On Wednesday afternoon, MLB Commissioner Rob Manfred said there would absolutely be
a season of some sort, said Black Lives Matter and pledged that the league would be an
“active participant” in social change.

=

    

Bea a
ii a :
ti fh \ 1 i Ne 7 ss
OTT | AN ;

Oh, and then he presided over the first round of a draft with no ability to tell the players
selected what might be in store for them in terms of actual development this year. Because
a real minor league season isn’t happening.

He might as well have said: “Welcome to professional baseball, where you will not be play-
ing this year.”

It’s going to take a special kind of player to work through those challenges.

Which might help explain why the Rangers selected second baseman Justin Foscue of Mis-
sissippi State with the 14th pick overall Wednesday despite the fact he plays a position that
isn’t usually highly valued at draft time.

Foscue is a hitter. An “impact” bat is the way they described him. Hitting plays.

And makeup, the Rangers believe, will help him push him toward the upper end of his ceil-
ing. Given that college teams played about two week’s worth of games this year, that’s one
thing scouts can be sure didn’t rust in the COVID19 lockdown.

“We talk about guys who eat, sleep and drink baseball,” Rangers scouting director Kip
Fagg said. “He’s that kind of guy. And he plays with a little bit of a chip on his shoulder.
He’s got a fiery nature.”

Speaking from his home in Huntsville, Ala., Foscue, 21, said, “I’ve never been that top-
ranked kind of player. But I always thought I belonged in the SEC, at that level. I put my
head down and didn’t listen to noise and always believed in myself.”

In listening to him and looking at video, it’s not difficult to envision the Rangers seeing
another Nick Solak. In less than a year, Solak, acquired in a trade with Tampa Bay, has
pushed himself into the lineup (if there is ever one). Like Solak, Foscue is a small, but solid,
second baseman. Like Solak, he’s a hitter first. Like Solak, he was overlooked by scouts
coming out of high school. Like Solak, there is that confidence that seems to now be as

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 1/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Rangers pick ‘fiery’ infielder Foscue in 1st round

much a part of the Rangers’ draft modeling as anything else. They want baseball players.
Tools are still important, but so is aptitude and drive.

Like Solak, he hit in college. As a sophomore, Solak put together a .324/.416/ .439/.855
slash line at Louisville and played himself into the second round after a strong junior sea-
son. As a sophomore, playing in the country’s best conference, Foscue hit .331/.395/.564/
.958. About the best conference line: Of the first 14 picks, six were from the league

where it “just means more.”

The league where Foscue believed he belonged is also the league where he differentiated
himself from other prospects on the Rangers’ board.

“T separate myself from other people with my drive and my selfmotivation,” Foscue said.
You could hear him saying as much to the Rangers in any of their phone conversations or
Zoom talks or whatever it was the Rangers did to put together a draft board this year. You
could envision the Rangers being convinced by it, too.

Now, here’s the thing: If you buy the rankings, Foscue carried a lower firstround

grade. Baseball America and Mlb.com’s prospect gurus had him ranked in the 30s. Given
the Rangers’ suboptimal draft history, it is not irrational to wonder if they could have
overevaluated him.

It’s also worth pondering if the Rangers didn’t look at the available players, all of whom
came with questions, and saw a guy who could sign for less than slot value ($4,036,800)
and give the team more flexibility to take some bigger risks with their final four picks
Thursday.

Vanderbilt coach Tim Corbin, who faced Foscue the last three years, was very complimen-
tary of him. He likened him to Jed Gyorko or Logan

Forsythe. Both have had legitimate major league careers, but more as utility players than
everyday regulars.

The scouts believe he will be limited to second base. There are questions about whether his
significant leg kick can carry over from college to professional baseball. Those questions
are valid. “He has always performed in a bigtime conference,” Fagg said. “He has always
impacted the ball. He has some things to work on; every drafted kid does. But I truly believe
in this kid’s bat.”

Someday, too, he will get a chance to affirm those beliefs.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 1/page/1/textview 2/2
