2020. 6. 17. U.S. surpasses 100,000 deaths

U.S. surpasses 100,000 deaths

Grim milestone tops toll from Vietnam and Korea wars combined

The Dallas Morning News - 28 May 2020 - 1A

Health care workers at Southern New Hampshire Medical Center in Nashua on Wednesday
waved at a departing patient who recovered from COVID19. The U.S., which has the highest
number of confirmed cases of COVID19 in the world, surpassed a milestone Wednesday in
the pandemic: 100,000 deaths.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

|
iS
!

 

i

os edt Picasa ee

The U.S. surpassed a jarring milestone Wednesday in the coronavirus pandemic: 100,000
deaths.

That number is the best estimate and most assuredly an undercount. But it represents the
stark reality that more Americans have died from the virus than from the Vietnam and
Korea wars combined.

“It’s a striking reminder of how dangerous this virus can be,” said Josh Michaud, associate
director of global health policy with the Kaiser Family Foundation in Washington.
Worldwide, the virus has infected more than 5.6 million people and killed over 350,000,
with the U.S. having the most confirmed cases and deaths by far, according to a tally by
Johns Hopkins University. Europe has recorded about 170,000 deaths, while the U.S.
reached more than 100,000 in less than four months.

The true death toll from the virus, which emerged in China late last year and was first re-
ported in the U.S. in January, is widely believed to be significantly higher, with experts say-
ing many victims died of COVID19 without ever being tested for it.

At the end of March, the United States eclipsed China with 3,500 deaths. Now, the U.S. has
not only the highest death total, but the highest number of confirmed cases of COVID19 in
the world, making up more than 30% of the global total.

or)

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200528/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. U.S. surpasses 100,000 deaths

The virus exacted an especially vicious toll on New York City and its surrounding suburbs,
killing more than 21,000. At the peak, hundreds of people were dying per day in New York
City, and hospitals, ambulances and first responders were inundated with patients.

The densely packed New York metropolitan area, consisting of about 20 million people
across a region that encompasses the city’s northern suburbs, Long Island and northern
New Jersey, has been the hardesthit corner of the country, accounting for at least onethird
of the nation’s deaths.

Four U.S. senators, including Lisa Murkowski of Alaska, are calling for a moment of silence
to honor those who have died from COVID19. The moment of silence is planned for noon
Monday.

Among the 100,000 deaths was 74yearold Michael Ganci, a resident of Newington, Conn.,
who died March 21. He was a public school teacher, a grandfather and father of four, anda
4thdegree belt Sensei in Kyokushin karate.

For his daughter, 45yearold Joanna Ganci of Beverly,

Mass., the milestone and other statistics are important to understand the scope of the
virus.

“But at the same time, I think the danger of counting, the danger of statistics, is that it just
minimizes the human element,” she said. “It’s like, what number is going to make an im-
pact for people who haven’t been touched by it?”

Dr. Wafaa Elsadr, director of ICAP, a global health center at Columbia University, called the
U.S. death rate shocking.

“Tt reflects the fact that we have neglected basic fundamentals for health,” Elsadr said.
“We have neglected public health and we have failed to secure access to quality health ser-
vices to all Americans.”

“So, now we are in this shameful situation,” Elsadr said. “It is the most vulnerable people
in our midst, the elderly, the poor, members of racial/ ethnic minority groups who are the
ones disproportionately getting sick and dying.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200528/page/1/textview 2/2
