2020. 6. 17. While the U.S. added

While the U.S. added
They warn we’re still feeling shutdown hit, with threats looming

The Dallas Morning News - 6 Jun 2020 - 1A + By DOM DIFURIO and MITCHELL SCHNURMAN

2.5 million jobs in May, unemployment remains sky high and threats are looming.

Texas jobless claims Unemployment rate

SR Wesscandiing | Twouna’ paniens ane fuipied tc
May 30 | sc yoiin March te 128% in Agel

Anil 18%

 

4 ns “WAM IASON D SEMA
Mot paso ne aofeshoo! Seas analy adarsted
SCE: LOS Ge paar mer cl Labor SCMIACE: Tascas Werk fcres Gormminicr.

Maybe we found the bottom, but we’re still underwater.

On Friday, the government reported that the U.S. economy added 2.5 million jobs in May,
the largest onemonth increase ever — at a time when the nation was both reeling from the
coronavirus and beginning to reopen many businesses.

The national unemployment rate was 13.3% in May, down from 14.7% in April, according
to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Many economists had projected 20% unemployment,
largely because over 40 million people have filed for unemployment benefits since the
pandemic took hold.

A lower rate is better than higher, but it’s still the highest unemployment since just before
World War II. Two of Texas’ marquee sectors, energy and air transportation, have been hit
hard and face stiff headwinds on the road to recovery.

Other threats are looming, such as budget shortfalls for state and local governments. And
federal relief programs, which incentivized employers to retain workers and boosted ben-
efits for the unemployed, are slated to wind down soon.

““We were expecting much worse numbers for May, but we’re still in the middle of an ex-
tremely serious economic event,” said Robert Dye, chief economist for Comerica Bank in
Dallas. “And Texas, in particular, is feeling the brunt of it.”

Texas lost more than 1 million jobs in April and reported an unemployment rate of 12.8%.
The state’s job figures for

May won’t be released until June 19, and economists cautioned about expecting a big re-
bound in Texas.

Said Bruce Bullock, director of the Maguire Energy Institute at Southern Methodist
University: “The good news is it’s better than we thought it would be. The caution is it’s
just one data point.”

A messy data point, too. As in the previous month, the BLS warned that many workers who
were absent from their jobs were recorded as employed. If workers were classified accu

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200606/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. While the U.S. added

rately, the report said, the unemployment rate would have been about 3 percentage points
higher.

Over half the jobs added in May, 1.37 million, were in restaurants and bars. Some of that is
probably due to the federal Paycheck Protection Program, which offered forgivable loans
to small businesses that maintained their payroll or rehired furloughed workers. That ends
this month.

It may also indicate that restaurant owners are expecting business to come back after a few
months of stayathome orders.

For Texas, where new coronavirus cases have spiked in the past week, the uptick in U.S.
employment is encouraging, said Waco economist Ray Perryman. Many economists expect
Texas to recoup some job losses within the year.

“It remains to be seen how things will come out for Texas, but given the national turn-
around ...a major drop seems less likely,” said Perryman, adding that the state tends to
follow U.S. unemployment claim trends.

Nearly every state is in the process of reopening its economy under restrictions related to
the coronavirus. But epidemiologists have warned of a potential second wave of infections,
which could again bring targeted shutdowns.

Unemployment claims filed with the Texas Workforce Commission have plateaued since
peaking in April. The state is still experiencing record joblessness — high enough to trig-
ger a program that provides 13 more weeks of benefits to unemployed Texans.

Even as bars, restaurants and stores begin to hire again, other employers are still strug-
gling and laying off workers, Perryman said. Some numbers, such as jobless claims, are so
fluid and volatile that he warned about putting too much stock in them.

“One individual could have been counted multiple times if they happened to move into and
out of the workforce more than once over the period,” said Perryman.

A key question is how many furloughed employees will be brought back. In a survey about a
month ago, 77% of laidoff workers said it was likely they would be rehired.

But in a survey of Texas business executives by the Dallas Fed, the sentiment wasn’t mu-
tual. Just 42% of execs said they intended to bring back their furloughed employees.

Such contrasting sentiments, the expiration of federal support programs and the threat of
COVID19 spreading make it tough to predict the timeline for a recovery.

“There’s just a whole swirl of tidal forces going on in the labor market,” said Dye.

For the year, Comerica has forecast a slight decline in Texas employment. It expects 12.6
million jobs in the fourth quarter, down from 12.9 million in the fourth quarter of 2019.
That’s actually an optimistic view.

On May 22, the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas projected that Texas would lose about 1.5
million jobs this year. The Dallas Fed said that in December the Texas unemployment rate
would be almost 13.9% — far above the 7.5% that Comerica projects for the fourth quarter.
Dye expects the nonenergy parts of the Texas economy to outperform national metrics.
And Texas started reopening earlier than many states, which has boosted the outlook — as
long as the coronavirus doesn’t surge here.

“We think Texas will hold up a little better” than the nation, Dye said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200606/page/1/textview 2/2
