2020. 6. 17. MUSEUMS vandalized but collections unharmed.

MUSEUMS vandalized but collections unharmed.
Vandalism at Crow, Perot, Nasher further complicates reopening

The Dallas Morning News - 1 Jun 2020 - 1A - By MICHAEL GRANBERRY Staff Writer mgranberry@dallasnews.com

Vandals caused extensive damage early Sunday to both the Crow Museum of Asian Art and
the Perot Museum of Nature and Science in downtown Dallas. They also spraypainted graf-

fiti and shattered a window at the Nasher Sculpture Center.

 

——

eer ——— _ es fe a at A — Be ee =

On a night of looting and vandalism that extended to the city’s cultural exhibit spaces, only
the nearby Dallas Museum of Art remained unscathed.

The Meyerson Symphony Center and the AT&T Performing Arts Center, which includes the
Winspear Opera House and the Wyly Theatre, also had no damage.

The vandalism followed a second day of protests over the killing in Minneapolis of George
Floyd, a black man who died in police custody after a white officer pinned him to the
ground with a knee to his neck.

Each of the Dallas museums had formulated plans to reopen in the coming weeks after be-
ing closed because of the coronavirus pandemic. But now, said Crow director Amy

Lewis Hofland, “we have new plans.”

Hofland said the attack on the Crow began around midnight, when people picked up chairs
provided for outdoor seating and used them to break 10 windows. She said two more
windows had bullet holes and another was broken by rocks, which left gaping cavities near
the museum’s Flora Street entrance.

The Crow has yet to calculate the dollar amount of the damage, Hofland said, noting that

security has been enhanced, with the Crow and other nearby buildings being hastily

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200601/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. MUSEUMS vandalized but collections unharmed.

boarded up.

‘(A majority of our windows were smashed on Flora Street, but the collection is safe,” she
said.

The vandals did get into the Lotus Shop, the museum gift store, where, Hofland said, they
engaged in a spree of ransacking and rock throwing.

Security and Dallas police responded almost immediately, she said. No arrests were re-
ported. The museum and local investigators will pore over security footage, which Hofland
said was extensive.

Nearby, at the southern edge of Victory Park, the Perot Museum of Nature and Science was
also vandalized, prompting this statement from the museum Sunday afternoon:

“Our nation is hurting. That is first and foremost on the minds of all of us at the Perot
Museum. That said, we can confirm that during the night of May 31, 2020, the museum
was vandalized. Windows and a door on the Field Street side were broken, and the plaza
doors also were damaged. We suffered some additional property damage, but no injuries
have been reported.”

An unoccupied security vehicle parked in the museum’s extended parking lot was set on
fire around 7:40 p.m. Saturday, but the flames were soon extinguished by authorities.

The statement added that Perot officials are “working closely with the Dallas Police
Department to continue monitoring the building, and we do not anticipate any adverse
impact to our plans” to reopen later this summer.

In the Dallas Arts District, the damage at the Nasher was mild compared with that at the
Crow and Perot, external affairs director Jill Magnuson said.

The Dallas Museum of Art had no damage, said spokeswoman Jill Bernstein. Yet, it and the
other museums were boarded up Sunday morning to ward off further attacks.

The vandalism adds another layer to an already severe crisis. The pandemic was one thing.
A night of crime was unexpected. For arts institutions suffering mounting economic woes,
the weekend did nothing to make recovery easier.

The Dallas Museum of Art and the Perot have not reopened since being closed in mid-
march, but the Museum of Fine Arts in Houston and the Houston Museum of Natural Sci-
ence have reopened in recent days.

‘We are working through various reopening scenarios,” Bernstein said about the DMA.
Magnuson at the Nasher said, “We are still evaluating our reopening.”

At the Crow, Hofland said, “We have a lot of work to do.”

At the performing arts venues Sunday, outdoor furniture was moved inside to discourage
any further vandalism in the Arts District.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200601/page/1/textview 2/2
