2020. 6. 17. SHARON GRIGSBY:

SHARON GRIGSBY:

If you don’t know what to say about the police protests, perhaps it’s time to
admit ignorance.

The Dallas Morning News - 2 Jun 2020 - 1A - sgrigsby@dallasnews.com

At this grievous moment in our country’s history, it’s so hard for me to know what to say
— or whether any words are appropriate from someone whose skin color has allowed me
lifelong privilege not afforded to so many of you.

Nae a eB x LS oars ae

  

      

Aig
Pe ra

Yet even as fear and my own internal critic moved me closer and closer to believing I have
no standing to speak out in a useful or constructive way, my heart knew better. The inex-
cusable and brutal death of George Floyd sickens me; the hijacking of protesters’ righteous
anger by random looters disgusts me.

Conversations and social media posts from the last few days indicate I’m not the only
white person feeling inadequate and tonguetied as we try to better understand the fears
and passions of our friends, colleagues

SHARON GRIGSBY and fellow North Texans.

Americans of color, especially African Americans, are angry — and they deserve to be.
What they need from the rest of us aren’t words, but action: Let’s step forward in sucha
way that they know their allies from their adversaries.

And if we think we have already sufficiently locked arms in this fight, we need to figure out
how we can do it better. Even the most goodhearted of us white folks have measures of in-
sensitivity and ignorance.

Just having the courage to acknowledge that is a big first step.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200602/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. SHARON GRIGSBY:

For my part, I’ve generally waged my battle against local racial injustice with upclose per-
sonal stories that allow readers — and myself — to walk in the shoes of someone we might
otherwise never know.

But too often those engaging narratives haven’t disturbed the toxic stew of systemic op-
pression and structural racism that underpin them. Too often they don’t ask the deeper
questions about the disparities that pervade every corner of our society — health care,
housing, education, wealth and personal safety.

That’s an area in which I can do better.

What’s different now?

I’m old enough to have seen a lot of socalled movements toward racial justice — some-
times sustained, sometimes fragmented. For all our generations of talk of wanting to stop
oppression and suffering, we have little to show for it.

But something feels a tiny bit different this time. Maybe it’s wishful thinking, but I sense a
deeper committed motivation.

Sure, a lot of people are just going about their business as usual. But significant protests
continue to take place all over North Texas; not just in Dallas and Fort Worth, but in small
towns and suburbs such as Mansfield, Frisco and Rockwall.

George Floyd’s death on Memorial Day occurred almost 1,000 miles from here, so why the
growing protests? We didn’t see this kind of passion in two sickeningly similar cases: Ata-
tiana Jefferson, killed last October by a Fort Worth police officer as she and her nephew
played a video game in their home, and Botham Jean, shot to death about a year earlier by
an offduty Dallas police officer who mistook his apartment for her own.

In Floyd’s case, the whole world has watched the cop commit his crime on videotape: It
was a horrific, agonizing death as the officer pinned his neck to the ground with his knee
for eight minutes and 46 seconds as the 46yearold pleaded for his life.

The criminal justice system has historically been, at best, unreliable for people of color.
Anyone with a brain or a history book knows that. When it comes to flagrant brutality and
death, the rest of us try to comfort ourselves with the trope of “a few bad apples” in the
policing barrel.

Now at a time when everyone is already emotionally fried as a result of a global pandemic,
we have to come to grips with the fact that the system might be broken to an extent that
none of us has wanted to acknowledge.

‘No justification’

Rockwall police Chief Max Geron, whom I’ve long admired from his time with the Dallas
police force, wrote this: “The death of George Floyd is a stain on our profession. There is
no justification. We have to do and be better collectively and individually. It will make
policing more difficult for those who work to maintain public trust.”

I wouldn’t want to walk out on the thin ice that is public trust right now, given that we’ve
spent most of 2020 in frontrow seats watching how government has failed us with its
herkyjerky response to COVID19. There’s no evidence that our leaders were prepared for a
crisis that has left more than 100,000 Americans dead, 36 million people without jobs and
countless unknowns about the disease itself.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200602/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. SHARON GRIGSBY:

COVID19, similar to the criminal justice system, falls too heavily on people of color. It’s lit-
tle wonder that all manner of legitimate issues, concerns and fears are getting mixed to-
gether. But it’s also possible this mashup will lead to a different outcome than we’ve seen
before. Can we find truth and light in what’s currently a terrible darkness?

The generational horrors of racism in this country are complex, and no serious person be-
lieves they can be solved this week. But more people are bending toward the cause. Others
are making clear they won’t back down this time.

We’ve been through years of this. It stops now.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200602/page/1/textview 3/3
