2020. 6. 17. A woman’s grieving in coronavirus isolation becomes a lesson in listening.

A woman’s grieving in coronavirus isolation becomes a les-
son in listening.

Online community comforts woman after husband’s death

The Dallas Morning News - 25 May 2020 - 1A - By DAVID TARRANT Staff Writer dtarrant@dallasnews.com

One night last month, a series of tweets from a stranger got me thinking about mortality
and empathy and what we owe each other now.

   

 

I was home watching a movie that weekend night. A friend called and told me to check out
Lisa Rowe’s Twitter feed.

I knew all about the woman who calls herself @txvoodoo. She isn’t famous, but her witty
takes on everything from politics to aquariums have earned her 12,000 followers. Through
the alchemy of social media, I’d come to care about her even though I’d never met her.
Now she was writing in real time about the collapse of her husband, Scott. Paramedics had
come to her home in Fort Worth to take him to the hospital.

Her tweets came in bursts, no time for punctuation.

“Plz say prayers ambulance here scott in cardiac arrest.”

“They took him to the hospital they had the breathing thing attached and doing chest
compressions.”

She couldn’t go with him, she said. Hospital coronavirus rules.

“T just don’t know what to do.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200525/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. A woman’s grieving in coronavirus isolation becomes a lesson in listening.

A woman tweeted back to her: “Find your phone charger. Do it now. You will need your
phone charged. Find the cable. Plug it in. Charge a spare power supply if you have it.”
Minutes later came Lisa’s next tweet. The hospital had called. “he’s gone”

Just two words, a whisper of disbelief. But that wasn’t the tweet that stayed with me. I was
more haunted by the one before it:

“T just don’t know what to do.”

I felt for my internet friend in her terrible, frozen moment. And I sympathized. Her words
struck me as a sad motto for where we all are right now. At a time when leaving the house
requires a kind of costbenefit analysis, we’re left groping in the dark, and it’s hard for any
of us to know what to do — for ourselves or each other.

Direct message to Lisa

I knew from Lisa’s posts on Twitter that she hadn’t yet received the death certificate.
Scott’s body remained at the funeral home, where it would be cremated. The next time she
would see him would be when she received his ashes.

She was alone. With social distancing, she couldn’t mourn properly. Even friends couldn’t
give her a long hug. And most of her friends were on social media anyway.

I was one of them, sort of, so I sent her a direct message and she responded.

Over several phone conversations, she told me the story of her life with Scott: How they
met online in the 1990s, when she was living in Miami and he was in rural Virginia. How
they found common ground in books and computers. And how he eventually moved to
Florida and married her.

They settled in Fort Worth in 2012, when Scott got a job as a computer programmer and
developer. They did not have children. Their lives were happy and full with their four dogs
and their hobbies — Lisa with her knitting and Scott with his woodworking.

Lisa, who will be 58 in October, deals with a litany of health conditions, including lupus,
rheumatoid arthritis and diabetes. Scott, 10 years her junior, was the healthy one, she said.
After he was diagnosed with hypertension several years ago, he became meticulous about
taking his medication. He had a cuff at home to measure his blood pressure and kept a
chart of the readings he took three times a day.

Feeling vulnerable to loss

His death didn’t make sense. Lisa was haunted by questions: Did COVID19 have something
to do with it? Hasn’t the virus been tied to heart problems in some cases? Scott wasn’t
tested, so she can never know.

How could this have happened?

For me, Lisa’s experience brought up longburied memories of a Memorial Day weekend 20
years ago.

My wife, our two little kids and I were visiting friends who had kids and a pool. You know
where this is going.

I’m sitting by the pool, talking to another dad, thinking all the kids are back in the house.
One of the moms shouts, and I look up to see her pulling a body from the water.

Natalie is 2. She is already drawing pictures, taking after her artistic mom. A sweet and cu-
rious child, she loves to sit splaylegged on the grass, making every doodle bug and wiggly
worm into a pet.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200525/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. A woman’s grieving in coronavirus isolation becomes a lesson in listening.

Now she is lying on the pool deck, limplimbed, lips blue, face wet and pasty. Feeling a
surge of panic like an electric shock, I kneel next to her. My hands tremble as I push on her
chest, trying desperately to remember the basics of CPR.

Someone has called 911 and is repeating instructions. Turn her on her side! I do. She
coughs. She spits up. She coughs again. She looks around.

In the background, we hear the sirens.

I spent the rest of that day with a kind of elation I doubt I will ever feel again. But that feel-
ing soon gave way to a paralyzing mixture of fear, guilt and shame. Shouldn’t I have paid
better attention?

I felt more vulnerable than ever before. Life could fall apart in an instant.

That sense of uncertainty returned this spring, summoned by a galloping pandemic and by
Lisa’s grief. As I felt again my own vulnerability to sudden death or lifealtering loss, I
couldn’t help but empathize with her.

You could see her grieving in real time on Twitter. With both of her parents gone and no
immediate family, she invited the empathy of strangers who, after a spring spent in lock-
down, understood better what it was like to suffer in isolation.

And they responded.

Her followers checked on her daily. They sent food to her house. They called, they texted,
they DM’D. They replied to her tweets. She got direct messages of comfort from a priest in
England and a former Army Special Forces officer, both of whom had recently lost their
spouses.

A week after Scott’s death, she lamented in a post: “I’m not going to get to go to anew
ethnic restaurant with Scott. It took me 12 years to get him to step out of his Southern Boy
food zone and now it won’t happen again.”

A woman replied: “My heart breaks for you. You’! never not miss him. Hopefully it will
hurt a little less.”

The next day, Lisa wrote: “It’s weird the things that come into your mind. We didn’t have a
big life anymore. I liked going with him to Home Depot or just to [Joann’s] for craft stuff.”
Someone replied: “That’s what is beautiful about marital love: the simple things. I’m so
sorry that you have to go through this during the quarantine.”

‘He made my wedding ring’

One day, I went to see Lisa in the subdivision where she lives in southwest Fort Worth. We
sat a few feet apart in an open garage that faces the street. Scott’s woodworking machines
and tools took up most of the twocar space. His Samsung phone lay on a bench where it
was still connected to a charging cable.

Lisa sat next to a table, where she displayed a selection of the wooden pens Scott liked to
make. Also on the table were Scott’s ashes, delivered by the funeral home in a container
inside a burgundy velvet bag. She still wasn’t used to thinking of him “in a box,” she said
with a rueful smile.

With the mind of an engineer, he loved making things. “He made my wedding ring,” she
said, holding out her left hand to show off the metal band embedded with chips of blue-
green opal.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200525/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. A woman’s grieving in coronavirus isolation becomes a lesson in listening.

Her black curly hair framed a pink face that grew animated as she talked of her life with
Scott. Though they were not religious, she said she understood the need for mourning rit-
uals. She especially appreciated the Jewish custom of shiva, in which relatives sit with the
bereaved, offering comfort and listening to their stories.

Talking, online and with me, helped with her grief, she said.

And that’s how I came to understand my role that afternoon in the garage. It was simply to
sit with Lisa and listen as she remembered her life with Scott. Just as her friends on social
media have sat with her, virtually, safely distant but as close as her fingertips.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200525/page/1/textview 4/4
