2020. 6. 17. White House testing plan

White House testing plan
Trump administration’s blueprint places burden on states to do exams

The Dallas Morning News - 26 May 2020 - 1A - FROM WIRE REPORTS

that puts the burden on states is criticized by Democrats.

WASHINGTON — The Trump administration’s new strategy for coronavirus testing — one
that puts much of the burden on states while promising to provide supplies such as swabs
and material to transport specimens — was characterized as flawed by Congressional
Democrats on Monday.

The report, delivered on the Sunday deadline Congress set for a national testing strategy
for the novel coronavirus, doubles down on the administration’s stance that individual
states, not the federal government, should bear primary responsibility for carrying out di-
agnostic tests to help curb the pandemic.

The plan drew harsh criticism from Democrats on Monday. In a joint letter, House Speaker
Nancy Pelosi, Senate Democratic leader Chuck Schumer, New Jersey Rep. Frank Pallone Jr.
and Washington Sen. Patty Murray said the administration “still does not have a serious
plan for increasing testing to stop the spread of the virus.”

President Donald Trump, who has been eager to revive the economy by loosening coron-
avirusrelated restrictions, vowed Monday, “Together we will vanquish the virus and
America will rise from this crisis to new and even greater heights.”

The Washington Post ob

tained the 81page document, called Covidig Strategic Testing Plan, from an individual on
Capitol Hill who was not authorized to disclose it. Federal health officials did not release it
publicly, submitting it to four congressional committees as required by law.

Patchwork approach

The plan, sought by public health experts and congressional Democrats since the virus be-
gan circulating in the United States in late February, arrived as the nation’s coronavirus
cases exceeded 1.6 million and deaths closed in on 100,000 — both the highest in the
world. Public health authorities emphasize that diagnostic testing to identify who is in-
fected, along with antibody testing to determine who might have immunity, are crucial
tools to slow the spread of the highly infectious virus and to develop strategies to make it
safe for states and communities to reopen. Without a nationwide strategy, states have de-
veloped their own approaches, creating a patchwork, with some parts of the country doing
far more testing than others.

The administration’s testing plan says every state should aim to test at least 2% of its pop-
ulation in May and June. The document, however, lists the testing targets each state re-
ported to federal officials for May, totaling 12.9 million tests nationwide, rather than lay-
ing out goals the federal government is calling on each state to meet.

“With support from the federal government to ensure states are meeting goals, the state
plans for testing will advance the safe opening of America,” the document says.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200526/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. White House testing plan

And in keeping with the portrayal by Trump and others in his administration that the pan-
demic is under control, the document says that epidemiologists and public health organi-
zations have said that if 10% of tests are positive for the virus over the course of a week,
that is “enough to assure broad coverage of the population.” It says 41 states already have
achieved that goal.

Testing data

The availability of tests and test kits has been a critical problem with the administration’s
pandemic response since the beginning. Testing began late because of problems in the
central lab at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, which was at first the only
source of a diagnostic test. Even when academic and commercial labs began developing
tests, government bureaucracy delayed their use. And the supply of testing materials has
been a recurrent problem, though the White House consistently says there are ample tests.
The number of tests nationwide has hovered lately around 400,000 a day, according to the
Covid Tracking Project, which compiles and publishes state testing data. That is hundreds
of thousands a day fewer than various research models say is necessary. It includes an as-
sertion made recently by Brett Giroir, an assistant HHS secretary in charge of testing, that
the nation will have the capacity to perform 40 million to 50 million diagnostic tests a
month by the end of the summer.

The new report, prepared by the Department of Health and Human Services, elaborates on
a blueprint the White House released last month for increasing the nation’s capacity for
coronavirus testing. That 11page document, released April 27, also placed responsibility
primarily on states, saying the federal government’s role would be to “provide strategic
direction and technical assistance,” while regulating tests and testing equipment. The
government would “act as supplier of last resort,” it said.

Under a $484 billion coronavirus relief package that Congress adopted in late April, law-
makers devoted $25 billion for testing. The law says each state must submit to HHS a de-
tailed coronavirus testing plan for the rest of this year. It also requires the department to
submit a national testing strategy to the four congressional committees — including plans
to increase the amount of testing available and to curb disparities among communities.
The deadline for both was Sunday.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200526/page/1/textview 2/2
