2020. 6. 18. SOONER SELECTIONS

SOONER SELECTIONS

We focus on the OU's stout MLB Draft class, highlighted by first-rounder
Cade Cavalli

The Oklahoman - 13 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Vic Reynolds Staff writer vreynolds@oklahoman.com

Skip Johnson likely faces the daunting task of replacing his entire weekend rotation of

pitchers going into the 2021 season after the results of this week's MLB Draft.
=" — adie :

 

            

om

The So one rs saw firstround pick Cade Cavalli go to the Washington Nationals, third-
round pick Levi Prater to the St. Louis Cardinals and fourth-round pick Dane Acker to the
Oakland Athletics. All three could return to school since the NCAA granted an extra year of
eligibility to spring-sport athletes whose seasons were cut short due to the coronavirus
pandemic. But they aren't expected to turn down an MLB contract.

However, Johnson isn' t worrying about the future. Instead, he's thinking about how
putting crops of talent into professional baseball should be the standard at Oklahoma.

“T look at the University of Oklahoma as being a Power 5 school and I don't have an expec-
tation for kids,” Johnson said on a Zoom call on Friday. “But that's what it should look
like, right? I mean, we're the University of Oklahoma.”

The three highlight a stout Sooners draft cl ass. Along with the pitching trio, catcher Brady
Lindsly was taken in the fourth round, and OU signees Ed Howard and Daxton Fulton were
taken in the first and second rounds, respectively.

Ca val li, aB ix by native, was the headliner for OU's

potential draftees, and most viewed him as a sure fire first-round pick. After spending his
first two seasons with Oklahoma pitching and batting, Cavalli transitioned to pitching ex-
clusively in 2020 and struck out 37 batters in 23 ¥/3 innings pitched.

“Cade can really spin the ball. He has the ability to throw fastball, curveball, slider, change
,” Johnson said .“I think that's the thing that he's going to continue to grow in repeating
his delivery. He's got a feel for all of those things. He's got some toughness to him too.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/2020061 3/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. SOONER SELECTIONS

Prater, an Ada native, started four games in 2020 and posted a 3.42 ERA. He was a named
to the All-Big 12 Second-Team during his sophomore season in 2019 after starting 14
games, leading the team in strikeouts with 97 and allowing a . 211 batting average.

“(He's a) fierce competitor. A guy that is never going to give in. He gets after it,” Johnson
said. “(He has) a three-pitch mix. His last outing he was at 91, 94, a power breaking ball
plus a change up. It's an uncomfortable at-bat. ... I think he's going to continue to grow.
He's not ever going to give in.”

While Ca val li and Prater spent their entire collegiate careers with the Sooners, Acker
made his way to Norman after playing two seasons at San J ac into College in Pasadena,
Texas.

Despite only appearing in four games at OU, Acker etched his name in Sooner record books
by tossing a complete game no- hitter against LSU on March 1, a game the Sooners won 1-
O. It was the first complete game no-hitter at Oklahoma since 1989.

Johnson said he could tangibly see Ac ker' s growth as a pitcher despite his brief time in the
program.

“T think it just shows you what this program's about, shows you what this baseball pro-
gram's about, what our coaching staff is about: It's about development,” Johnson said. “I
think that was what was beautiful. I really wish we could have reaped t he benefits of the
rest of the year, who knows how that would have played out? But I gotta think it would
have been good, for sure.”

Along with losing the three pitchers and Lindsly, the Sooners are also losing highly touted
prospects in Howard and Fulton, who is a Mustang native.

The silver lining for Johnson is he is retaining two 2020 signees in Norman product Cade
Horton and Westmoore product Jace Bohrofen, who likely would have been selected if the
draft wasn' t shortened to five rounds due to the coronavirus.

While the two will have to wait at least three years until they reach the pro ranks, Johnson
said their time at Oklahoma could pay dividends down the road.

“T was sitting there thinking about, What am I gonna tell these guys tonight if they don't
get drafted?” Johnson said. “But I think it's better. They have more time for life lessons...
Are you going to feel sorry for yourself that you didn't get drafted and that you didn't get
the money? Or are you going to get better from it?”

When looking at the talent leaving Norman for the pro ranks, questions still linger over OU
baseball after ending the season 14-4 and ranked in the top 15.

What could have been? Could this have been the year the Sooners reached the College
World Series since 2010?

It's a topic Johnson has mostly been able to avoid in the past few months, but after seeing
the results of the draft, he's found himself thinking about more frequently.

“Now that those guys are gone you dwell on it a little more, but we're gonna get over it ,”
Johnson said .“We' re happy for them they got that opportunity because they worked for
that, they really did. It's fun. They're always going to be a part of OU baseball.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/2020061 3/page/1/textview 2/2
