2020. 6. 18. *CATS' HELP EASE LONELINESS

“CATS' HELP EASE LONELINESS

Life-like animatronic cats are being used to help Alzheimer's patients
manage during a time of isolation

The Oklahoman - 8 Jun 2020 - A1 - ByBy Danielle lvanov Sun Sentinel

FORT LAUDERDALE, Fla. — When Marlys Cordes flipped on the light in her daughter's
bedroom, the last thing she expected to hear was a robotic meow. She had no idea how in-
teractive the toy cat responsible, Silver, would be.

  

Silver is her 53-year-old daughter Christine Hasey's gray, life-like animatronic cat. Deliv-
ered a week and a half ago as a surprise for Hasey, the pet is from the Louis and Anne Green
Memory & Wellness Center at Florida Atlantic University.

Silver, who purrs, meows, blinks and rolls over, is one of more than 30 robotic cats the
memory and wellness center uses to treat dementia and Alzheimer's disease. Although
they've been used for over a year on campus, the cats are now going to homes to see how
effective they are as treatment for the increased isolation brought on by the coronavirus
pandemic.

Hasey is one of the first to receive a robotic cat at home.

She has dementia caused by Reye's syndrome, and before quarantine began, she attended
therapy five days a week at the memory center. There, she did not have her own robotic
cat, but she had structure to ground her days and friends to make crafts with. But when the
center switched to teletherapy because of the coronavirus pandemic, Hasey had to stay
home, drastically magnifying her seclusion.

“Especially since this coronavirus hit, she's not motivated to do much at home,” Cordes
said of her daughter. A typical day for Hasey involves watching “Golden Girls” episodes,
completing word search puzzles, going out for two walks and sleeping.

“Not much else interests her,” Cordes added.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/20200608/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. *CATS' HELP EASE LONELINESS

But now, after just a week and half with Silver, Hasey is improving. She regularly talks to
the toy cat, brushes its fur and jokes about it acting drunk when it rolls over.

Hasey knows Silver isn't alive, but she loves and interacts with her robot pet. And because
Silver doesn't eat, poop, shed or pee, it's not a burden on the rest of her family.

“It makes me feel really encouraged to see her playing with that cat,” Cordes said. “I'm
happy that she has anything to stimulate her mind and body.”

“Potential to help a lot of people’

Hasey's cognitive impairment is intermediate. She recognizes her surroundings and the
day, month and year. She still argues with her mom sometimes, like any mother-daughter
duo. But she often seems lost in thought, and she needs a walker to keep her balance.

To slow the progression of her dementia and keep her mind as sharp as possible, Hasey
needs not just pills but positive social interaction. Silver provides the latter.

FAU registered nurse and assistant professor Lisa Wiese said holding on to empathy is cru-
cial for people battling cognitive impairment. Because animals have triggered empathy
and other positive emotions in patients, Wiese said, a former student thought robotic pets
might do the same.

She was right.

The robotic cats project, first introduced by former student Bryanna Streit last summer for
three months, not only got all 12 participants cooing and smiling in person, it even reduced
their overall anxiety and depression by 6 points and their dementia loss by 1-to-2 points,
Wiese said.

“We're so thrilled it's working for cognitively impaired adults because there's very few
things that stimulate them,” she said.

Now, Melissa Johnston, a nursing doctoral student at FAU, is carrying on Part Two of the
pet project by evaluating how the robotic cats help at home during quarantine.

The memory and wellness center has 30 cats for cognitively impaired adults ages 55 and
older who want to participate. The cats are free of charge for participants as they were al-
ready paid for by grant funding through the university or donated by the Florida Depart-
ment of Elder Affairs.

To get involved, email Wiese at lwiese@health. fau.edu. Participants will be required to
give consent, work out a way to receive the cat and regularly complete mood scales and
phone questionnaires during the 12-week project.

Johnston said she hopes to start the project by July.

“T think this has the potential to help a lot of people,” she said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/20200608/page/1/textview 2/2
