2020. 6. 17. Early hot spots make progress, but infections rise elsewhere

Early hot spots make progress, but infections rise elsewhere

The Washington Post : 6 Jun 2020 - A1 - BY JOEL ACHENBACH AND CHELSEA JANES

The coronavirus appears to be in retreat in regions that moved decisively to contain it after
being hit hard, including New York and New Jersey. But the virus is persisting — and, in
some places, spreading aggressively — in parts of the South, Midwest and West, including
in states that were among the last to impose shutdowns and the first to lift them.

 

Bs

Data compiled by The Washington Post shows that 23 states, as well as the District of
Columbia and Puerto Rico, have seen an increase in the rolling seven-day average of coro-
navirus cases compared with the previous week. Most have registered an increase of 10
percent or more.

Now, public health officials across the nation are warily eyeing caseloads and hospitaliza-
tions to see if there is a spike in

infections resulting from mass protests against racism and police violence.

The protests, sparked by the Memorial Day killing of George Floyd in police custody in
Minneapolis and other recent instances of violence against African Americans, have been
outdoors. The virus is most easily transmitted in closed spaces with poor ventilation. Even
so, the massing of protesters for hours on end in chaotic circumstances, along with police
use of chemical agents, could lead to a spike in cases in coming days and weeks.

“One person can infect hundreds. If you were at a protest, go get a test, please,” New York
Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo (D) said in a briefing Thursday. “The protesters have a civic duty
here also.”

The notion of civic duty has, in part, contributed to a rapid shift in the public response to
the coronavirus epidemic. Public health experts and local authorities in many places once

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200606/page/1/textview 115
2020. 6. 17. Early hot spots make progress, but infections rise elsewhere

urged so much caution that shutdowns ensued, streets emptied and grieving families were
forced to limit or cancel funerals.

Now, local officials throughout the country are lifting restrictions, hoping to restore eco-
nomic activity, and some are signaling support for the protests. In Michigan, Gov.
Gretchen Whitmer (D) joined a civil rights march Thursday while wearing a facial covering.
More than 1,200 medical professionals have signed an open letter, drafted by doctors and
researchers at the University of Washington and posted online, stating that the importance
of protests outweighs the risks of massive gatherings.

“Protests against systemic racism, which fosters the disproportionate burden of COVID-19
on Black communities and also perpetuates police violence, must be supported,” the letter
states, adding that demonstrators should still follow “public health best practices” such as
social distancing and wearing masks.

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention released a statement saying it was “moni-
toring closely” the demonstrations.

“Protests and large gatherings make it difficult to maintain our recommended social dis-
tancing guidelines and may put others at risk,” the CDC said. “It is too early to know what,
if any, effect these events will have on the federal COVID-19 response. Every local situation
is different.”

The coronavirus map is, indeed, complicated at this point — as complicated as the virus it-
self, which can lead to the potentially lethal disease covid-19 or leave an infected person
with no symptoms at all.

The early epicenter, New York City, has made huge strides in driving down caseloads and
death rates, and hospitals are no longer overwhelmed.

But a briefing document prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dis-
tributed Thursday to senior federal officials captured the scale of the challenges remain-
ing. FEMA tracks how many days in a row a state records a decline in new daily coronavirus
cases. Thirteen states — Arizona, California, Idaho, Kentucky, Mississippi, Nebraska, Ore-
gon, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia, Washington and Wisconsin — had not
shown a sustained daily decrease as of Tuesday, according to the document, a copy of
which was obtained by The Post.

A separate Post analysis of county-level data reveals the patchwork nature of the epidemii...
with some communities showing dramatic spikes — a tripling or more of cases within the
last two weeks — even as surrounding areas remain stable. These localized outbreaks have
often been in counties that contain meat processing plants, prisons or assisted-living fa-
cilities. New data shows that almost a third of the deaths nationally have been in nursing
homes.

Mississippi Gov. Tate Reeves (R) announced this week that the number of patients on ven-
tilators in Mississippi hospitals hit a new high last weekend, and he warned that “the
threat of covid-19 is as great as ever, if not greater.”

Florida on Thursday reported its highest number of new daily cases — 1,419 — since the
state began providing such statistics in March, according to the Miami Herald. More than
half the state’s cases so far have been in the South Florida counties of Broward, Miami-
dade, Monroe and Palm Beach.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200606/page/1/textview 2/5
2020. 6. 17. Early hot spots make progress, but infections rise elsewhere

“T still think we have a lot of cases to come,” said Julie Swann, a former CDC adviser and
professor of industrial and systems engineering at North Carolina State University, who
said the continued spread was not inevitable and could have been stopped with sufficient
testing and tracing.

Viral transmission can be subtle. The virus typically takes about five or six days to incubate
to the point that it causes symptoms, such as fever, headaches, body aches or a dry cough.
Even when symptoms appear, many days can pass before a person seeks a coronavirus test.
There is another lag of days before results reach public health departments. As a result, ex-
perts view current data as reflecting what transmission was like a couple of weeks in the
past.

Asymptomatic transmission complicates the process of drawing conclusions, too. Many of
the people who traveled to beaches and other locations on Memorial Day weekend, and
who participated in protests against police violence, are young and less likely than older
people to develop a serious illness from the virus. They may never show symptoms. They
can, however, transmit it.

“If we are going to see a resurgence at onset of summer, it will be in this time window,”
said David Rubin, director of Policylab at Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, which has a
model covering about 400 counties that forecasts where transmission may spike. “If we
don’t see a bump, it may suggest that outdoor transmission is a relatively minor compo-
nent of the epidemic during summer.”

The role of weather in transmission of this virus is not well established. In general, viruses
do not like heat and humidity. A new report published in the journal Science says weather
isn’t as important as susceptibility: Most people have yet to be exposed to this virus and
have no immunity.

“Lack of population immunity is the much more fundamental driver than climate,” said
the study’s lead author, epidemiologist Rachel Baker of the Princeton Environmental In-
stitute.

California is dealing with a massive outbreak in Imperial County on its southeastern border
with Mexico. Last week, more than 60 patients were sent to neighboring Riverside County
to alleviate the surge on local hospitals. The county, with a population of about 181,000,
had 2,540 active cases as of Thursday evening.

Yuma County, Ariz., which borders California and Mexico, is also seeing hospitalization
spikes, according to Cara M. Christ, the state’s health director.

Christ and Gov. Doug Ducey (R) told reporters much of the state’s rising caseload can be
traced to increased testing. But state data also shows an uptick in hospitalizations and
positive test rates, suggesting testing is not entirely responsible for increased case num-
bers.

“The virus is widespread,” Ducey said. “This virus is not going away.”

The virus spread easily until mid-march, when the first shutdown orders and the wide-
spread adoption of social distancing began to flatten the epidemiological curve. Data com-
piled by The Post shows at least 107,000 deaths from the coronavirus as of Friday.

The CDC projected Thursday that by June 27, 118,000 to 143,000 people in the United States
will have died of covid-19.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200606/page/1/textview 3/5
2020. 6. 17. Early hot spots make progress, but infections rise elsewhere

The worst weeks for coronavirus deaths were in early April. As the daily death toll has
dropped, so have precautions by many Americans. In many places, people are not routinely
wearing facial coverings.

Many different agencies and research groups are tracking the virus, and their reports gen-
erally echo one another even though they slice the data in distinct formats. None of the
data clearly signals a summer resurgence of the virus at the national scale, at least in terms
of cumulative statistics.

The heterogenous nature of the epidemic in the United States reveals itself in South
Carolina. Charleston has not been hard-hit, according to Christine M. Carr, a professor of
emergency medicine and public health sciences at the Medical University of South
Carolina. But the state’s daily reports show that the area known as Pee Dee, in the north-
east corner of the state, and communities along the heavily traveled I-95 corridor have
been slammed.

Carr hypothesizes that travelers on the interstate could be bringing the virus to these ar-
eas. These sections of the state are already vulnerable: They have limited health services,
high rates of poverty and a population that is heavily African American, a demographic
that has suffered disproportionately from covid-19.

Michael D. Sweat, director of the Center for Global Health at the Medical University of
South Carolina, has been maintaining models tracking the virus’s spread and calls the lo-
calized hot spots a series of “microepidemics.” His research shows that, as the state has
lifted restrictions, people have begun to move around nearly as much as they did before the
coronavirus arrived.

He said anecdotal evidence suggests that people are no longer taking the risk of infection
seriously. He attributes that to misconceptions about the nature of epidemics, not knowing
someone who has been sickened by the virus, and the mixed messaging from federal and
state governments.

“(All those things are adding up to a bit of a muddled situation,” Sweat said. “It would be
much better if we had consistent guidelines, consistent recommendations and if everyone
were on the same page about the dire nature of this epidemic.”

Case counts do not tell the entire story of what’s happening with transmission. If testing
increases dramatically, case numbers can go up even if transmission is easing.

But positive test rates in South Carolina have been going up even as testing has expanded.
And on Wednesday, the state recorded 17 additional deaths, several times the usual daily
average — both signs that transmission is increasing.

Mississippi has also seen a rise in new cases that can’t be explained simply by more test-
ing. The state has been largely open for business for many weeks, and youth sports leagues
are soon resuming.

“There are certainly more people with covid now than there were in March,” said Richard
Roberson, vice president for policy and state advocacy at the Mississippi Hospital Associa-
tion. “The numbers don’t appear to be going down. The combination of more people with
it and more people moving around with it is a huge concern for us.”

Many of the states experiencing increases in caseloads are home to rural counties with
limited or no hospital access. Those that do have hospitals often find them ill-equipped to

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200606/page/1/textview 4/5
2020. 6. 17. Early hot spots make progress, but infections rise elsewhere

handle large surges of covid-19 cases. In Alabama, rural counties near Montgomery are
sending patients to city hospitals for treatment, though Montgomery is dealing with rising
cases of its own. According to Donald E. Williamson, president of the Alabama Hospital As-
sociation, multiple hospitals in the Montgomery area are nearing capacity in their inten-
sive care units.

Some Mississippi hospitals have already been overwhelmed by an influx of patients from
outbreaks at nursing homes. Roberson said many hospitals in Mississippi — which has not
expanded Medicaid benefits — were operating at a loss before the pandemic and now must
figure out how to stay in business. If they fail, the “health-care deserts” will be vaster in
scale, he said.

“We worry about it every day,” Roberson said. “We worry about our hospitals having the
resources to treat our patients under normal circumstances.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200606/page/1/textview 5/5
