2020. 6. 17. Loss in Louisville: Fatal shooting of David Mcatee stuns many.

Loss in Louisville: Fatal shooting of David Mcatee stuns
many.

David Mcatee fed Louisville police for years. To some, his fatal shooting
doesn’t add up.

The Washington Post - 5 Jun 2020 - A1 - BY TIM CARMAN

The man known as “Yaya” was in negotiations to buy the property at the corner of 26th
and Broadway in Louisville’s West End so he could build a proper space for his thriving
barbecue business. But as Sunday night turned into Monday morning and the usual week-
end crowd stayed past the city’s 9 p.m. curfew, David Mcatee’s dream died when he did.
The founder and namesake of Yaya’s BBQ was killed in an exchange of gunfire following a
display of law enforcement power that one city council member said demonstrates how
police treat black communities differently than white ones. {1 The folks who gathered at
the intersection were not protesters, said David James, president of the Louisville Metro
Council. James, who is African American, represents the district in which Mcatee con-
ducted business, had known Mcatee, 53, for more than a decade and had hired him occa-
sionally to cater events. James said the people in the streets last weekend were the same
ones there every weekend: West Louisville locals who would move between Yaya’s BBQ,
Dino’s Food Mart and a gas station across Broadway. These were partyers, James said, not
people protesting George Floyd’s death in police custody in Minneapolis on Memorial Day.

  

“Mcatee was known for giving out free food to his community. He had such a big heart.”
Edward Lee, a chef, restaurateur and humanitarian in Louisville

But that’s not how the Kentucky National Guard and Louisville Metro Police treated them
when they rolled up on the crowd, James said.

“Maybe four-and-a-half seconds, five seconds after they get out of that truck, they’re
clearing that lot using pepper-ball guns,” James said about the scene early Monday.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200605/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. Loss in Louisville: Fatal shooting of David Mcatee stuns many.

“There was no walking up to people and saying: ‘Hey, man, there’s a curfew, and we’re
trying to clear the lot and keep everybody safe. We’ re just trying to get everybody to clear
out.’ That didn’t happen.”

“Someone still has to explain to me why we chose to do that,” James added. “It’s as if they
rolled up to a point in Iraq and they were ready to rock-and-roll.”

The Louisville Metro Police Department did not immediately respond to a call for com-
ment. Members of Mcatee’s family also did not return multiple calls for comment.

James knows a few things about policing. He spent decades in law enforcement before he
became a politician. He worked as a patrolman, detective and SWAT team member for the
police department and for several years was commissioner of the Department of Criminal
Investigations, the investigative arm of the Kentucky attorney general’s office. James
questions the tactics used by the Kentucky National Guard and Louisville police at 26th
Street and Broadway, including whether they would have used the same approach in a part
of town where the population tilts white.

“T have a belief that if the same scenario — people hanging out and having a good time on
the east end of town — I’d think that officers would have probably walked up and said:
‘Hey, we have a curfew. I need you to shut this down,’” James said. “I would hope they
wouldn’t just roll out of the truck and start blasting away with pepper balls and yelling at
people about curfew. To me that just seems not a good situation.”

Former law enforcement colleagues have been contacting James since Mcatee’s death, in-
credulous at the idea that the man who has fed police free for years would suddenly open
fire on them. But Louisville police released silent surveillance footage Tuesday that ap-
pears to show Mcatee firing a gun from the doorway of his barbecue shack.

“He was a friend of law enforcement,” James said. “I had so many law enforcement people
call me about that since this has happened and said: ‘I just can’t believe that he would be
shooting at police. It blows my mind that that would happen.’ ”

Mcatee wasn’t just a friend of law enforcement. He was a friend to seemingly everyone in
the community. John D. Marshall is the chief equity officer for Jefferson County Public
Schools, and part of his job is to help homeless and hungry students in the district. Mar-
shall said he met MCAtee at a public event, and the barbecue man said if there was any-
thing he could do to help students to just let him know.

“About a month or so passed, and I remembered it and ran into some families that had
been completely starving,” Marshall told The Washington Post. “We went over there, and
he didn’t miss a beat. He fed them in abundance. No guilt, no questions.”

James had similar stories about Mcatee and his generosity toward those in the West End.
“Let’s just hypothetically say a meal would cost $10,” James said, “and you told him that
you only

David Mcatee “never fired a gun, never had to pull a gun. He only had it for protection. So
what happened that night that would make him fire a gun?” Brenda Lee Brookins, a friend
of the Mcatee family for 58 years

had $5. He’s going to give it to you for $5.” Or if Mcatee recognized you were “having a
hard time, he’s not going to charge you anything. He just wants you to be fed. He was just a
really good guy.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200605/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. Loss in Louisville: Fatal shooting of David Mcatee stuns many.

Mcatee’s community spirit — and his exceptional barbecue, people say — were why Yaya’s
attracted large crowds every weekend, despite the fact the business had no apparent web-
site, no social media presence, no Yelp page and no reviews from local critics. It was the
cultural hub of West Louisville, James said, a place where locals would relax and enjoy a
plate of MCAtee’s “sweet and sassy” barbecue. It didn’t need the usual promotional tools
to be popular. It just was.

“He just had the power of his food and his personality,” James said.

Brenda Lee Brookins has been a friend of the Mcatee family her entire life, all 58 years. Her
mother and Mcatee’s mother grew up together. Brookins said it was always David Mcatee’s
goal to own his own restaurant. He went to cooking school, she said, but she wasn’t sure if
he graduated. He toiled in commercial kitchens for years, much of the time in Atlanta, but
moved back to Louisville about a decade ago. He set up a grill at the corner of 26th Street
and Broadway before he even had a building from which to prep, said Brookins. He saved
enough money to rent the small structure near the corner. He was working toward building
his own place.

“He was patiently and strategically trying to go higher and higher to achieve his ultimate
goal of having a brick-and-mortar restaurant,” Brookins told The

Post.

The popularity of Yaya’s in general, and Mcatee in particular, has made it difficult for peo-
ple to process the violent way in which he died. The shooting happened not just in the wake
of Floyd’s death in Minneapolis but also two months after Louisville officers fatally shot a
black resident, Breonna Taylor, in her apartment, leading to protests over police violence.
After learning officers involved in Mcatee’s shooting had not activated their body cameras,
Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer (D) fired Police Chief Steve Conrad on Monday, hours after
Mcatee’s death.

James said law enforcement officers put Mcatee in a “bad situation” when they fired pep-
per balls from the start. Once people began to retreat inside Mcatee’s small building off
26th Street, the police and National Guard continued to shoot pepper balls at them, James
said. You can see it in the video that police released, he pointed out. One pepper ball ap-
pears to hit and explode on contact with Mcatee’s niece.

“I just feel like the way the whole thing was approached caused that situation,” James said.
“T’m not making excuses for David’s behavior, and he’s the only one that can tell us what
was going through his mind, and he’s not here. And the police didn’t have their body cam-
eras on.”

“What if I were him? How would I react if I had just saw my niece get shot by something?
And I just got shot by something?” James continued. “Would I try to defend myself ? There
are no police cars’ red and blue lights going. It’s dark outside. I think it’s possible. I mean, I
don’t know. I don’t know what they’re yelling. I don’t know if they’re saying, ‘Drop the
gun.’ I don’t know any of that stuff.”

Mcatee’s mother, Odessa Riley, is still trying to make sense of it all, said Brookins, the
family friend. David is the fifth child she will have buried. One son died of cancer, two other
sons died in non-police shootings and her daughter died in January from a heart ailment,
Brookins said. Riley, 81, has been asking for clarification about David’s killing.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200605/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. Loss in Louisville: Fatal shooting of David Mcatee stuns many.

“She can’t wrap her head around how do you go from grilling — because he was actually
preparing a plate for a customer — to shooting. It’s not in his character,” Brookins said.
“Of course, he’s in a neighborhood where he knows he has to have protection. Everybody
knew he always had a gun, but he’d been at the same location for almost three years. He
never fired a gun, never had to pull a gun. He only had it for protection. So what happened
that night that would make him fire a gun?”

In the days since his death, friends, family and well-wishers have stopped by Yaya’s to
place flowers on the chain-link fence next to the business or hang signs, such as the one
that reads “We can’t breathe,” a reference to some of the last words from Floyd’s mouth as
a Minneapolis officer pressed his knee against his neck. There is a desire to remember
Mcatee for his years of generosity, not for the ugly moment of his death.

Edward Lee, a chef, restaurateur and humanitarian in Louisville and elsewhere, wants to
create an initiative to continue Mcatee’s work to feed the hungry in the community.
“Mcatee was known for giving out free food to his community. He had such a big heart,”
Lee said in a text message. “We plan on continuing his mission of caring for his commu-
nity through the gift of food. We hope to honor his name and his legacy through our ef-
forts.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200605/page/1/textview 4/4
