2020. 6. 18. Black business owners call for unity, understanding

Black business owners call for unity, understanding

The Oklahoman « 8 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Dale Denwalt Staff writer ddenwalt@oklahoman.com

As the first Black Lives Matter rally came to an end May 31, Jerome Taylor went back to
work at Endo, a cannabis dispensary he co-owns at NW 6 and Shartel Avenue.

From his vantage point, he saw the protesters walk by, toward the Oklahoma City Police
station just a few blocks south. At some point during the peaceful protest, he saw things
get out of hand.

“There was a group of Caucasian people, they started throwing stuff from behind those
protesting,” Taylor said.

And that, he said, is what triggered police responding to the protest as an unlawful gather-
ing. He also saw vandalism to other storefronts downtown performed by what he described
as typically white kids with skateboards smashing windows. Oklahoma City Police said Fri-
day they received more than a dozen reports of disorderly conduct and vandalism that oc-
curred around the weekend protests.

That situation nearly came to Taylor's doorstep. Someone from the crowd told him they
overheard another person say, “Let's find a dispensary.”

“That's why we gathered closer and said don't come over here, this is black-owned, don't
touch this,” said Taylor.

Some of those nearby helped protect the business during the violence.

“T felt great about that. I understand they're hurting, too. They tried a peaceful way.

They tried to kneel. They tried every single way to do this, and you can't focus on the effect
without focusing on the cause first. What caused this?” he said. “We need to see each other
as humans first. Not, * that's a black human, that's a white human.' They're human.”
Being a black business owner who set up shop in downtown is a badge of honor for Taylor,
who said he deliberately chose to be there.

“To us, that's status. You can own a business in downtown Oklahoma City, right in the
heart of the city,” he said. “You don't have to be segregated into Midwest City or any black
areas. We can all be one big melting pot and have a black-owned corporation in the middle
of all this.”

His vision of unity is shared by another metro black business owner, Lauren Palmer, who
runs The Wild Mother Creative Studio with her sister, Le ah. Along with designing floral
plans, the sisters have stepped up as voices in the struggle for understanding and accep-
tance.

They've take non bridal media for its overt lack of minority representation. And with the
help of friends in academia, the Palmer sisters developed The Conversation Workshop, an
anti-racism curriculum designed to teach ways of responding to the systems of racism
that every experiences.

“T didn' t realize when I started this journey in business, but people look to me and my sis-
ter to educate in ways,” Lauren said.

After offering the workshop as a pilot program at Oklahoma State University, they decided
to expand its reach by developing a virtual workshop that was released Friday.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/20200608/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. Black business owners call for unity, understanding

“We' re seeing a really unique moment in history right now where people are clamoring
for information, clamoring for guidance ,” said Lauren. “As artists and activists, and as
women of color, we get to lead. We help to midwife new moves in culture and it's definitely
humbling. We're grateful for a community that surrounds us and hems us in with care, and
love for us as women, so we can offer a scholarly resource for people who are wanting to
address their own lack of understanding.”

In an essay posted to The Wild Mother's social media platforms, the sisters wrote that
people who follow their journey online witness more than just flowers. They' re willing to
lose followers, customers and money in the fight for black dignity and lives, they said.
“This is the creative outpouring of two black women in America, and the beauty you see on
our feed ... is an homage to our history, legacy, and the pain our black ancestors knew
well,” they wrote. “We see our work as an opportunity to heal and reclaim some of the
beauty that was stolen from our ancestors at the hands of white America's obsession with
power.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/20200608/page/1/textview 2/2
