2020. 6. 17. How solo cooks are getting by

How solo cooks are getting by

The Washington Post : 3 Jun 2020 - A1 - BY CHARLOTTE DRUCKMAN

One-person households share tips for eating well, alone in the chaos.

 

I did not attend the virtual lasagna party plastered all over my social media a few weeks
back. Neither did Candice Springer, Richard Lee nor Valen West.

Tayari Jones, a novelist in Atlanta, has no intention of making the layered pasta dish. “So
many of those foods that I’m seeing in articles and things for this batch cooking, for these
big dishes, they’re special occasion foods, and that’s fine if you’re with a big family,” she
said. “You have all the lasagna just one time. Or, you bake this really elaborate cake this
one time. But if I’m alone with a cake, that’s not good.”

That’s probably how you imagine those of us who are quarantining alone, though: in bed
with an entire cake or hunched over our kitchen sinks with a bowl of cereal.

If you imagine us at all.

While the U.S. Census Bureau estimated there were upward of 35 million single-person
households in this country in 2018, many food media seem to be operating under the as-
sumption that everyone is responsible for feeding a family of four.

I talked to a few of my comrades in solo sheltering to find out how we’re managing. No,
most of us are not making lasagna, but we are cooking, and we’re doing all right for our-
selves.

Based in Union City, N. J., Leigh-ann Martin, 35, an executive assistant at a biopharma
company, has been avoiding casseroles of any kind and the “heavy rice dishes and soups”
she grew up eating in Trinidad. “I need to stay positive, and in the past, eating rich foods
all time didn’t do any good for my mood.”

In Boston’s Brighton neighborhood, Springer, 33, who works at the city’s WBUR public ra-
dio station, has been craving her mom’s cooking: linguine with clam sauce, a riff on Por-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200603/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. How solo cooks are getting by

tuguese jagacida with kielbasa in place of linguica, meatloaf. She’s texting her mother for
the recipes, which make her feel closer to a family she can’t visit.

Previously, she adhered to a monthly $100 limit on her grocery expenditures. Now, she’s
shelling out $170 every two weeks when she walks 12 minutes to the nearest store with her
own small shopping cart. “I buy whatever I can fit in the cart, because it’s all I can manage
to get back home,” she explained over email. “This hasn’t allowed me the freedom to

cook or eat whatever I want as much anymore.”

Jones, 49, has been responding to the idiosyncrasies — or errors — inherent to online
shopping in Atlanta. “I cook whatever they give me,” she said. “If there is an edible item in
my house, I will cook that sucker. I will search the Internet. I will do whatever has to be
done. I cannot waste food in this climate.” Too many lemons? She preserved some in salt
and froze the juice of the rest in ice cube trays. 100 bulbs of garlic? She roasted some of the
heads whole, squeezed out the softened cloves to use in soups, and preserved the rest of
the raw cloves in vinegar.

She’s actively maintaining what she calls her “food archive,” or the assortment of left-
overs in her freezer. There is the “cooking and freezing phase,” followed by the defrosting
phase.

Lea Addington, the 28-year-old Detroit-based chef who founded LIT Vegan Kitchen to
provide culinary education and wellness consulting for plant-based eaters, isn’t “really
into leftovers,” or “wasn’t before the quarantine,” she said. When she does have them, she
leverages them to barter for things she needs. A container of quinoa scored her a loan of
gym equipment for a month, and she traded other food with a friend to secure some cookie
dough for her freezer. Funnily enough, she does not share them with her cousin, with
whom she has been cohabitating during the outbreak. The two have been living together as
though alone: Addington’s cousin, an omnivore who contracted the coronavirus and was
isolated in her room for weeks, eats (and shops) very differently from her vegan relative.
Richard Lee was delighted when one of his neighbors shared her shipment of Vidalia
onions from Georgia with the rest of the building’s remaining tenants. For the past few
years, he had been taking almost all his meals at the diner downstairs from his apartment
in Midtown Manhattan. Now, the 70-year-old artist and interior designer cooks every
meal — a limited rotation of pasta with meat sauce, grilled cheese, eggs or tuna with beans
and one of those onions. He is not ordering in at all after discovering a regular-size pizza
with sausage and extra cheese from the place down the street is $30.

A few blocks north on the Upper East Side, Betty Halbreich wouldn’t dare order in. The
personal shopper has made it 92 years without ever having done so. “I’m embarrassed to
order for one,” she admitted. After fourplus decades of living alone, she has “it down toa
certain pattern,” she said. “I have a tray, and I have a cloth on it, and a cloth napkin, and I
prepare dinner.” The only difference, under quarantine, is her reluctance to shop for
groceries. Even though she’s uneasy asking friends and neighbors to buy things for her,
she’s forced to, and as appreciative as she is, she hates not being able to select her produce
herself.

Her daughter, Kathy, 71, executive director of the Robert Rauschenberg Foundation in New
York City, decamped for her small farmhouse on the North Fork of Long Island and has re-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200603/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. How solo cooks are getting by

alized she “would be a good person to stock a bomb shelter,” she said in an email. Shop-
ping for groceries “is no longer pleasurable; it breeds anxiety.” She shops every three
weeks, with intermittent visits to the farmers market for greens. She plans her list out
carefully, based on things she likes and ideas for future meals. Without the incentive of
guests, she’s cooking with “less gusto” than before and preparing lesselaborate fare:
turkey soup with vegetables, apple and fennel salad, hummus, pizza from storebought
dough.

Meanwhile, in Dubuque, Iowa, her son, Henry Kohring, 31, an engineer at John Deere,
makes his own pizza dough. He keeps it simple, too, but believes in doing as much from
scratch as possible for the sake of cost- efficiency. “I would brag about how much money I
saved on something before I bragged about a fancy meal,” he said. “If I can buy the 25-
pound bag of flour for $10 and use it to make 50 loaves of bread at 50 cents each, then I’d
brag about that.” (This would explain his bread machine.) But when he’s pressed for time
— and the price is right — he’s equally comfortable opening up a can of chili or box of
Kraft mac and cheese, or picking up a burrito.

Sisters Christina and Kim Ku live less than 30 minutes away from each other in New York’s
Queens borough, but their strategies for feeding themselves couldn’t be farther apart.
Christina, 37, a freelance computer graphics artist who’s out of work, is a proud weekend
meal-planner. “I don’t like to spend time thinking about what to eat every day, and if I
make a big batch of something tasty, I can eat it every day for a week, no complaints,” she
conveyed over email. “I’ve mostly settled into a routine of cooking two big pots of food,
one for lunch and one for dinner, one sauce and one soup or carb dish.”

Kim is not interested in planning. Problem solving and curiosity guide whatever culinary
strategy the 36-year-old product designer has, and thanks to the farm subscription she
joined to cut back on shopping, she has plenty of motivation. “Sometimes, they just give
you a box of random vegetables, and I feel that I’m such a novice, I can’t recognize half of
them,” she said, then added that the “whimsy” she seeks as a cook “comes from the joy of
finding out what something is.”

A 50-something author and journalist in Los Angeles, Lynell George believes cooking for
oneself is vital to maintaining mental wellness and encourages others who live alone to go
to “the trouble” to cook for themselves, even if they don’t have other mouths to feed. “It’s
important to remind people that, hey you’re worth ‘ that trouble,’ and it really isn’t trou-
ble at all. Treat yourself with worth,” she encouraged in an email.

That hasn’t been easy for Valen West, 46, a restaurant owner in San Francisco — and not
just because, despite her years working in a restaurant, she was in the front of house and,
as a result, is “clueless in the kitchen.” It’s also because, as she has observed, “being in
isolation and having unlimited time to self-analyze who you truly are will bring the
demons to the surface.”

Although she’s committed to cooking all her meals and spends money only on food, she
ends up in a “stare-off ” with her fridge, she said via email. “I still don’t know. What do I
feel like eating? ... 1 can only rearrange the few food items I have so many times where I’m
trying to trick my mind but cannot trick my palate.” Her fear of wasting food and her re-
fusal to stand in line limit what she buys, and, therefore, what she can cook.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200603/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. How solo cooks are getting by

In Bothell, Wash., Steven Vertel, 57, a supply chain manager for an Internet retail com-
pany, does not suffer from West’s culinary equivalent of writer’s block; he sees cooking as
a creative outlet. But he is also mindful of both food waste and palate fatigue. He makes
more than he knows he’! eat in one night so he can have it for another meal or two. “I’m
not trying to cook for a whole week or have things to freeze beyond that. I don’t have a lot
of space in my kitchen,” he said. Plus, he adds, “after the second day, I’ve lost interest in
it.” Apparently, there is one exception to that rule: lasagna. He cooked one and made five
meals of it.

As for me, I’ve continued to conduct what I call my “kitchen experiments.” One of the
more successful of these is a recipe that affords all of the flavors and gooey-cheesed com-
fort of lasagna with little effort for those of us who are sequestered in solitude and don’t
want five meals’ worth of a hefty pasta casserole. It’s a frittata that’s full of spinach, ri-
cotta, mozzarella and Parmesan, and covered with tomato sauce. It’s intended to serve
one, with leftovers for another meal, maybe two. But it can probably feed up to three. ( You
can always scale it up and put it in a bigger pan if you’ve got the standard foursome, or
then-some.)

If anyone wants to make a party of it, I’ 1l be there — virtually, of course.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200603/page/1/textview 4/4
