2020. 6. 17. Health-care rule reversal The White House ended non-discrimination protections for transgender people.

Health-care rule reversal The White House ended non-dis-
crimination protections for transgender people.

HHS says Obamacare’s anti- discrimination rules limited to biological sex

The Washington Post - 13 Jun 2020 - A1 - BY ARIANA EUNJUNG CHA ariana.cha@washpost.com

The Trump administration on Friday reversed nondiscrimination protections for trans-
gender people in health care, a policy shift that has been among the top priorities of social
conservatives who constitute the president’s base.

The rule change, part of a host of updates pertaining to abortion, birth control and families
undertaken by federal officials over the past three years, represents an important setback
in the movement for LGBTQ rights. Under President Barack Obama, the concept of gender
in many areas of the law had been broadened beyond biological sex to encompass the myr-
iad identities that different Americans embrace.

Roger Severino, director of the Office for Civil Rights at the Department of Health and Hu-
man Services, has argued that when members of Congress who passed the 2010 Affordable
Care Act prohibited providers receiving federal funding from discrimination on the basis of
sex, they meant “the plain meaning of the term.”

HHS elaborated in a statement Friday that it believes those antidiscrimination provisions
apply only to “male or female as determined by biology.” It described the change as part of
efforts to remove “costly and unnecessary regulatory burdens” that it said were costing
American taxpayers $2.9 billion.

When health officials first announced their intention to change the rule in May, civil rights
groups said the reversal would allow health-care providers, as well as insurers, to deny
services to transgender individuals.

On Friday, the American Civil Liberties Union and Lambda Legal’s Transgender Rights
Project said they would challenge the rule in court.

“This rule change serves no other purpose than to target and discriminate against LGBTQ.
people. The cruelty is the point,” Sasha Buchert, a senior attorney for Lambda Legal, said
in a statement.

Buchert said the change was especially dangerous in the middle of the coronavirus pan-
demic and in an era when LGBTQ people are experiencing discrimination at disproportion-
ately higher rates when seeking medical care.

Civil rights groups described the new rules as part of a broader attack on reproductive and
sexual rights. The Trump administration over the past three years has taken numerous
measures to restrict abortion, emphasize abstinence over birth control and define the con-
cept of family as a man and a woman in settings from schools to the military.

The Department of Housing and Urban Development has separately sought to allow feder-
ally funded shelters to turn away transgender people for religious reasons, and the Depart-
ment of Defense has sought to allow troops to serve only in positions that match the sex
stated on their birth certificates.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200613/page/1/textview 4/1
