2020. 6. 17. Drawn-out recovery is forecast as slide eases

Drawn-out recovery is forecast as slide eases

Businesses, workers in limbo with economy still under threat from virus

The Washington Post : 5 Jun 2020 - A1 - BY HEATHER LONG AND ELI ROSENBERG

The U.S. economy’s steep slide appears to be leveling off amid signs that layoffs are easing,
travel is modestly picking up, and Americans are beginning to eat out again, but a recovery
from the coronavirus pandemic is still a long way off, with economic activity at deeply de-
pressed levels.

——

a ee

al
ie

 

On Thursday, the latest sign that the economic decline may be bottoming out came as the
government reported that 1.9 million Americans had applied for unemployment insurance
during the last week of May — a painfully high number but the lowest since the novel
coronavirus started spreading widely in the country in March.

The jobs data follows modest signs that the economy may be inching toward the begin-
nings of a recovery as the nation reopens. Mortgage applications have surged in recent
weeks with interest rates at record lows. Consumption of oil and petroleum products is up.
The number of travelers at airports, as measured by the Transportation Security Adminis-
tration’s precheck numbers, has begun increasing in recent weeks. Even restaurant reser-
vations have inched up.

“This covid recession will go down as the shortest and arguably the most severe in his-
tory,” said Mark Zandi, chief economist at Moody’s Analytics.

Zandi said the recession caused by the pandemic is likely to be over, almost as abruptly as
it started. He points out that private payrolls declined by 2.76 million people in May, ac-
cording to a report released Wednesday by payroll processor ADP. That was far below ana-
lysts’ estimates.

Yet, even when economists declared the Great Recession officially over in June 2009, the
unemployment rate did not return to prerecession levels until 2017, a reminder that the

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200605/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. Drawn-out recovery is forecast as slide eases

economic pain can linger for years. Similarly, experts predict that this recovery will take
years.

Cheered on by President Trump, some states have lifted some of their most severe restric-
tions in recent weeks, more businesses have reopened — at least partially — and brought
back workers. But there is still no sense of when commerce will resume at the scale seen
late last year. Until there is a widely available vaccine against the novel coronavirus, the
economy is likely to continue struggling at a low rate. And public health officials continue
to warn of a second wave of infections in the fall or winter, which could bring on another
round of shutdowns.

For now, the U.S. economy is in limbo, with many companies operating at half capacity and
a big question mark about how long firms can survive that way. Idled workers aren’t sure
when they will be called back, so they are hoarding cash. State and local budgets have been
decimated, which is likely to trigger more layoffs later this year.

“These are extremely ugly numbers, but because there were so many forecasts talking
about a total collapse of the economy, the numbers we’re seeing, while extremely bad,
aren’t the worst-case scenario,” said Lindsey Piegza, chief economist at Stifel Fixed In-
come. “It’s not as bad as it could have been. It’s an odd silver lining.”

The dueling stories about this economy — it is improving yet remains greatly depressed —
are likely to play out all the way through the presidential election. Trump is seizing on any
data showing a rebound and is taking credit for the bounce-back in the stock market,
where the S&P 500 index just experienced its best 50day rally since 1952.

“By the time of [the] election, I believe the economy will be doing phenomenal numbers.
Big job increase, big GDP increases, and that’ll be before the election,” Trump said Wed-
nesday on Fox News Radio’s “The Brian Kilmeade Show.”

“The stock market is booming,” he said.

But presumptive presidential nominee Joe Biden and other Democrats have been quick to
point out that millions of Americans remain out of work and that the job losses aren’t as
bad in other countries, raising questions about the U.S. government’s response to the pan-
demic. Biden predicts a slow recovery.

“Economic growth is likely to be back in positive territory by the third quarter,” Stifel’s
Piegza said, but “what we’re really talking about is going from extremely terrible to
slightly less terrible.”

Official government growth data looks at how much the economy changes from quarter to
quarter. Since the April-to-june period is likely to be one of the worst in U.S. history, the
third quarter, even if sluggish, will look like a big surge, giving Trump a talking point just
before the election.

What matters to many Americans is the job situation. When Americans feel it is easy to get
work, they tend to give the economy more-positive ratings and spend more. When people
fear they will lose their jobs, have to take pay cuts or have trouble finding new work, they
tend to save more. In April, the U.S. savings rate hit a record high of 33 percent, a sign of
how scared people are.

“The savings buildup over the past two months can hardly be considered firepower for fu-
ture consumption,” Bob Schwartz, senior economist at Oxford Economics, said in a recent

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200605/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. Drawn-out recovery is forecast as slide eases

note. “The stimulus checks were a one-time payment that has already run its course.”
The unemployment rate for May, due out Friday, is expected to be close to 20 percent, a
level not seen since the 1930s. The Congressional Budget Office released projections this
week showing it doesn’t expect the U.S. economy to fully recover until 2030.

The CBO also said that the pandemic will shrink the size of the U.S. economy by nearly $8
trillion in the next decade, assuming there are no more coronavirus waves that trigger
crippling shutdowns in coming months.

More than 40 million people have applied for unemployment benefits during the pan-
demic, and roughly 30 million are receiving aid, previously unimaginable figures that
wiped out a job market in which unemployment was at historic lows as recently as Febru-
ary.

‘Whatever optimism there is from seeing some people return to work, we’re not seeing a
drastic move off unemployment,” said Jay Shambaugh, a senior fellow at the Brookings
Institution. “If anything, we’re seeing a stable number of people on unemployment. Last
year it was around 1.5 million.”

Still, signs that the economy is no longer plunging are an encouraging start, forecasters
said.

New data from the Census Bureau’s weekly Small Business pulse survey shows businesses
are starting to get back on their feet. In the week ending May 30, about 3 in 5 small busi-
nesses reported revenue of above $15,000. That’s a massive reversal from a month earlier,
when 60 percent of businesses reported little or no revenue.

Other signs of a turning point are that only a quarter of businesses closed locations in the
past week, substantially down from a month earlier, and businesses are reporting fewer
supply-chain issues and missed loan payments.

Flights are also picking up. American Airlines announced Thursday an expansion next
month as travel demand picks up again. For July, the airline expects to fly 55 percent of last
year’s domestic trips, up from a mere 20 percent in May.

Americans are also beginning to eat out again. Restaurant reservations on the online plat-
form Opentable showed that more than 30 percent of its participating restaurants had be-
gun taking bookings as of June 3, vs. zero throughout most of April.

The Federal Reserve has scaled back its purchases of government bonds, a vote of confi-
dence that the worst probably is over.

Yet, the manufacturing sector is a telling example of just how modest any rebound is.
That sector experienced its worst contraction in April since the Great Recession. The Pur-
chasing Managers’ Index slumped to 41.5 in April, signaling a deep contraction. In May,
the index rose to 43.1, an improvement but far below the 50-mark that is considered
healthy and expansionary.

Such contradictions are also apparent in the job-market data, economists say. New jobless
claims are trending lower, but even with so much of the economy reopening, nearly 2 mil-
lion people filed new applications for unemployment aid.

“It’s a sign that things are not getting as worse as they were before,” said Nick Bunker,
economic research director at Indeed Hiring Lab. “We have seen a reduction in the pace of

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200605/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. Drawn-out recovery is forecast as slide eases

people becoming jobless. So that’s positive. But we’re still seeing claims at astronomical
levels than what we saw before this crisis.”

Job postings tell a similar story. The number of jobs posted on Indeed’s site in May was 5
percent higher than in April. But the number was still 34 percent lower at the end of May
than at the same date in 2019 — a staggering drop.

“It is, at most, an extremely partial rebound,” Bunker said. “Postings are still growing at a
rate far slower than we saw last year. I think it’s worthwhile celebrating that the pace of
things getting worse has slowed down. But that means we haven’t hit a bottom yet. There
are still a fair amount of folks losing their jobs and folks not hiring yet.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200605/page/1/textview 4/4
