2020. 6. 17. Downtown Dallas protest sees local tensions flare

Downtown Dallas protest sees local tensions flare

The Dallas Morning News - 30 May 2020 - 1A - By TOM STEELE, SAM BLUM, DAVE BOUCHER, OBED MANUEL and
MARC RAMIREZ

The protests — and some of the turmoil — sweeping the nation reached North Texas on
Friday evening.

  

Outside police headquarters near downtown Dallas nearly a thousand people came to de-
mand justice for black Americans who have been killed by officers in recent weeks.

André Watson, a 30yearold teacher, stood at the outskirts of the growing crowd, tears
streaming down his face, at a loss about what more he can do to help bring change.

He said he was only 10 when a police officer first stopped and questioned him.

“T write to my senators. I write to my representatives,” he said. “I just don’t know what to
do anymore.”

He said that he hoped coming to the protest will mean something in the long run to help
end police violence.

Dallas resident Veronica Brown, 50, said the protest was the first she’d ever attended.

Her hope is that police will learn to interact with residents more: “Get to know us. Find out
what’s going on before you put matters into your own hands,” she said.

Whatever their expectations for change, the protesters were united in their anger over the
recent deaths of George Floyd and Breonna Taylor.

A Minneapolis officer knelt on Floyd’s neck for nearly nine minutes while he was hand-
cuffed Monday on the ground as onlookers watched in horror. The officer, Derek Chauvin,
was arrested Friday on charges of thirddegree murder and manslaughter. He and three
other officers — J.K. Keung, Thomas Lane and Tou Thoa — were fired Tuesday.

Taylor, a 26yearold Kentucky woman, was fatally shot by officers serving a noknock war-
rant at her apartment on May 13.

Friday evening, before the Dallas protest organized by Next Generation Action Network

began, dozens of people outside the police headquarters chanted, “We want justice” and
https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200530/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Downtown Dallas protest sees local tensions flare

“No justice, no peace.” Some carried signs reading, “We can’t breathe” and “All lives can’t
matter until black lives matter.”

Taking a knee

By 6:30 p.m., the group had swelled to about 150, and the demonstrators took a knee in
solidarity with those who have been affected by police brutality.

The action was a tribute to former NFL quarterback Colin Kaepernick’s silent form of
protest, which became the subject of national controversy.

“It’s a great way for people — any color, of any socioeconomic background — to take a
knee in solidarity to say: Enough is enough,” said Anthony Lazon, founder of the nonprofit
group Dallas for Change. “We’re not moving forward until we address these issues.”

He said organizers hoped to educate protesters on ways to push for greater police account-
ability in Dallas, noting the importance of the newly reformed police oversight board.

“T think there will be a moving sentiment, a peaceful sentiment,” he said earlier Friday.
“We definitely don’t want to escalate things into violence.”

August Mattevi and daughter Noah Dyer, 11, of Fort Campbell, Ky., were among those in
the crowd, which continued to swell more than an hour into the protest, filling the plaza
outside the police station and spilling onto sidewalks across the street.

“How many black people that are unarmed have to be killed by police?” Mattevi asked.
“There’s been so many.”

Just after 8 p.m., as police seemed to be preparing for the crowd to start marching, state
Sen. Royce West asked people to take a knee.

West, a Dallas Democrat running for his party’s nomination in the U.S. Senate race, said a
prayer and asked for justice. He also asked the protesters to applaud for Republican Gov.
Greg Abbott, who has called Floyd’s death “horrific.”

“There’s more to be done,” West said. “Don’t let this be the last time that you engage.”

As the sun set, the protesters began marching through the Cedars, then north into down-
town Dallas.

Some in the crowd stopped alongside a Dallas County Sheriff’s Department vehicle, throw-
ing water bottles against its windows and kicking its doors. One protester appeared to
strike the squad car with a skateboard before it drove off.

Other protesters could be seeing throwing objects at other law enforcement vehicles, or
spraying graffiti on them.

Police Chief U. Reneé Hall, who has condemned the actions of the Minneapolis officers,
was out among the officers monitoring the march.

“We're giving you the streets,” she told one protester after objecting to demonstrators
throwing rocks at her officers. “Don’t hit my folks.”

Tensions continued to rise as the night wore on.

Several hundred of the protesters continued onto Interstate 35E, where they blocked traffic
as authorities ordered them to disperse.

At Young and Griffin streets downtown, people started running — many of them coughing
— as policed released tear gas. In other areas, smoke was used for crowd control.

In downtown Fort Worth, several dozen protesters met at the old courthouse Friday. They
marched to Sundance Square, where they knelt and chanted “I can’t breathe.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200530/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Downtown Dallas protest sees local tensions flare

Dallas police said in a written statement ahead of the protest that they would not interfere
with “a lawful and peaceful assembly” of demonstrators exercising their First Amendment
rights but would take action if protesters committed criminal offenses or blocked traffic.
Dallas City Council member Adam Bazaldua, who represents South Dallas, said he supports
the Black Lives Matter movement but didn’t plan to attend the protest, which he feared
could lead to violence similar to that of July 7, 2016.

“T don’t like what I’m seeing across the country,” he said, referring to the unrest over
Floyd’s death. “I’m just too afraid that something bad may happen.”

Dominique Alexander, the head of Next Generation Action Network — which organized the
July 7 protest as well — said he was tired of being asked whether frustrations at the events
would boil over.

“If you don’t violate my rights, Dallas won’t burn,” he said.

Before the protest began, Dallas Mayor Eric Johnson said he supported people’s right to
protest peacefully and encouraged them to stay as safe as possible with the coronavirus
pandemic in mind.

As demonstrators streamed through the streets of downtown late in the evening, he posted
on Twitter that he was monitoring the situation.

“T understand the outrage, and I feel this pain deeply. What happened in Minneapolis is
unacceptable. But please, remain peaceful,” he said.

Protests have spread across the country in the aftermath of Floyd’s death, with demon-
strations in Minneapolis and other cities turning violent.

Houston protest

In Houston, the city where George Floyd grew up, several thousand people blocked a
downtown freeway Friday as they marched after a rally to protest his death.

The protesters ended up alongside Interstate 69, usually one of Houston’s more heavily
traveled traffic arteries.

A group of 60 to 70 people started by running to the freeway, where they marched for at
least half an hour.

Houston police accompanied the protesters as they marched for less than a half mile along
the freeway before leaving it.

No arrests were made, and the protesters then walked to a nearby park.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200530/page/1/textview 3/3
