2020. 6. 17. Visit puts spotlight on area megachurch.

Visit puts spotlight on area megachurch.

The Dallas Morning News - 12 Jun 2020 - 1A - By DAVID TARRANT Staff Writer dtarrant@dallasnews.com Twitter: @dave-
tarrantnews

From its first ministry 20 years ago in a living room with 30 people, Gateway Church has
become one of the largest and fastestgrowing places of worship in the United States.
Founded by Senior Pastor Robert Morris in Southlake, the nondenominational church has
since added multiple campuses across Dallas and Tarrant counties and counts more than
71,000 active attendees, according to its website.

On Thursday, President Donald Trump visited Gateway Church at its Dallas campus a few
blocks south of LBJ Expressway as part of a trip that included a fundraising dinner.

At the Gateway event, the president and senior administration officials spoke about several
issues, including the George Floyd protests, the coronavirus pandemic and the racial dis-
parities they exposed.

The presidential visit brought the national spotlight to a church that has grown in phe-
nomenal fashion since its modest beginnings in Morris’ Southlake home.

In 2003, three years after holding its first services, Gateway opened a 64,000 squarefoot
facility with a 600seat auditorium in Southlake.

Just five years later, to accommodate the fastgrowing congregation, Gateway broke ground
on its current Southlake campus, which features a 4,000seat auditorium.

Gateway continued growing and added campuses in North Richland Hills, Frisco, Fort
Worth and Grand Prairie. In 2016, Gateway added its campus in Dallas near the intersec-
tion of Hillcrest Road and Churchill Way.

During the 2016 presidential campaign, Morris was named to Trump’s evangelical advi-
sory board, which included a number of familiar names on the religious right, such as Jerry
Falwell Jr., president of Liberty University in Virginia; Jack Graham of Prestonwood Baptist
Church in Plano; and Robert Jeffress of First Baptist Church of Dallas, among others.
Morris, 58, is also an author of numerous books and runs a television show, Pastor Robert
Morris Ministries, which airs regularly on Trinity Broadcasting Network and Daystar.
Since the protests, Morris has shared his thoughts about racism on social media platforms,
such as Twitter.

Morris said he recently began to talk to ministers of different ethnicities, “and to hear the
stories of these precious men and women of God of the racism and prejudice that they
faced and that their families have faced, their parents, their grandparents, it will break
your heart.”

The Gateway website also includes resources discussing the Christian response to racism.
An introduction to the website’s page on racism, says: “We acknowledge the evils of
racism and discrimination fighting so hard to tear us and our nation apart at the seams ...
“While these issues can be difficult to talk about, we want to keep talking about them and
empower you with resources to help you in your own conversations.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 2/page/1/textview 4/1
