2020. 6. 17. Dallas PD to ban chokeholds

Dallas PD to ban chokeholds
City also says officers have duty to intervene if others misuse force

The Dallas Morning News - 6 Jun 2020 - 1A - By CASSANDRA JARAMILLO and DAVE BOUCHER Staff Writers

Dallas leaders on Friday announced new policies aimed at reforming the Dallas Police
Department after seven days of protests around the country over the death of George
Floyd, a black man killed when a white Minneapolis officer knelt on his neck for more than
eight minutes.

   
 

The city said it would formally ban chokeholds and any force intended to restrict a per-
son’s airway; implement by June 12 a policy to warn before shooting; and create guidelines
to release body cam and dashcam video of critical incidents.

Earlier, the Police Department said it had implemented a policy requiring officers to inter-
vene in any situation where force is applied inappropriately or is no longer required.
Before this week, the department document that outlines proper protocols for essentially
any occurrence — from how to wrangle an escaped zoo animal to what type of facial hair is
permitted — did not include a ban on chokeholds or other neck restraints. Nor did it say
officers have a “duty to intervene.”

The policies will now appear in the department’s general orders, according to a memo
from City Manager T.C. Broadnax.

“Addressing systematic issues and policing practices, which have led to unrest and racial
division within our community, have the greatest potential to transform and unite our
city,” he wrote.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200606/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. Dallas PD to ban chokeholds

But the changes announced Friday lag behind those already implemented in other North
Texas law enforcement agencies.

The Fort Worth Police Department has banned chokeholds since 1991 unless deadly force is
justified. The Plano de

partment also bans any neck restraint unless lives are at risk.

The changes announced Friday come four years after Tony Timpa, a white man, died in
April 2016 after several Dallas police officers handcuffed him and pinned him to the
ground while he screamed for his life. One officer had his knee in Timpa’s back for more
than 13 minutes. They laughed and mocked him after he became unresponsive, joking that
he was going to be late for school.

Timpa’s mother, Vicki Timpa, had already expected that Friday would be a hard day — it
would have been her son’s 36th birthday. But seeing local leaders focusing on Floyd’s
death hurt her. She said she felt as if her son’s death had been forgotten.

“They picked my son’s birthday to honor someone who was murdered just like my son.
They all know they killed my son,” said Timpa, sobbing in an interview Friday.

She has a federal lawsuit pending against the city.

As law enforcement agencies around the country reexamine practices in light of Floyd’s
death — Minneapolis police banned chokeholds Friday — advocates are calling for leaders
to implement reforms locally.

But activists called the changes in Dallas inadequate.

The largest police union, the Dallas Police Association, said many policies already call for
best practices, which are expected of officers.

Association President Mike Mata said the formal policies are redundant, arguing that his
officers do not use chokeholds and will intervene when they see misconduct.

“If Chief [U. Reneé] Hall feels she needs to make a policy in writing, I’m not against that,”
said Mata, who defended the actions of the officers involved in Timpa’s death.

The Dallas policies do not create a legal avenue to prosecute officers who commit miscon-
duct, said Sandra Guerra Thompson, a criminal law professor at the University of Houston,
though she applauded the department for reviewing its practices and committing to
change.

Sara Mokuria, cofounder of Mothers Against Police Brutality, said that she was disap-
pointed in the announcement and that the changes were “grossly inadequate.”

“We want a divestment of police and investment into our communities,” Mokuria said.
“We want alternatives to policing.”

Chokeholds, force

On Friday, Broadnax announced the Dallas department would formalize the ban on choke-
holds in its general orders. The ban echoes a memo issued by thenpolice Chief David Kun-
kle in August 2004.

In that memo, Kunkle stated that the “lateral vascular neck restraint” was no longer au-
thorized and that recruits would not be taught the technique. A police spokesman did not
say whether everyone hired since 2004 had been given this document or how new officers
were made aware of the chokehold ban.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200606/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. Dallas PD to ban chokeholds

The memo came several months after a Dallas police officer put a 23yearold man in a neck
restraint that contributed to his death. Officer Seth Rosenberg used it on Allen Simpson af-
ter a car and foot chase. The Dallas County medical examiner ruled that Simpson was as-
phyxiated from neck compression, according to The Dallas Morning News archives.

A grand jury did not indict Rosenberg, but the city offered to pay Simpson’s family
$800,000 in 2005.

Body, dash cam video

When it comes to police shooting suspects or a situation involving multiple injuries or
deaths, the Police Department does not have a policy on how to release body and dash
camera video.

The details of investigations into incustody deaths like those of Timpa and Diamond Ross,
who died of a PCP overdose in 2018, have taken years to be made public. In general, police
— by law — may refuse to make public any information, including video, from an ongoing
investigation. But the law doesn’t prohibit them from releasing the information.

In Ross’ case, videos showed her repeatedly asking officers for help as she was placed ina
police car and taken to jail. It was a year before the public learned about Ross’ death.

The video in the Timpa case was released only after nearly three years and legal interven-
tion by The Dallas Morning News.

On Friday, the Police Department pledged to implement by the end of June a policy on re-
leasing videos from its most serious encounters.

Warn before shooting

Dallas police also pledged to implement a “warning before shooting” policy by the end of
next week. The department did not provide details on that policy.

Typically, such policies require officers to give some sort of spoken command before fir-
ing. The Plano police policy on shootings says that a police employee “shall allow an indi-
vidual time and opportunity to submit to verbal commands before force is used.”

Fort Worth police Officer Aaron Dean did not give any warning before he shot and killed
Atatiana Jefferson in October through a window while making a welfare check at her
mother’s house at 2:30 a.m. Her nephew later told authorities that his aunt had heard
noises outside and pointed her handgun toward a window, an arrest warrant affidavit says.
Dean resigned and has been charged with murder. The department is currently working to
clarify its policy, Capt. Mark A. Barthen said in an email.

Duty to intervene

Dallas police implemented a new order that formally requires officers stop someone, or at-
tempt to intervene, “when force is being inappropriately applied or is no longer required.”
Police departments in Plano, Fort Worth, Mesquite, Frisco and across the country already
have similar “duty to intervene” policies.

The Dallas police code of conduct already bans the use of unnecessary or inappropriate
force. And in general, officers are already expected to step in if they witness wrongdoing.
“To me, it’s a little surprising that you don’t already have at least an ethical obligation” to
intervene, said Thompson, the criminal law professor at the University of Houston.

But there could be legal reasons to implement a policy like this, she explained. The policy
may create a more formal path to discipline for a violator or be required as a part of the of-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200606/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. Dallas PD to ban chokeholds

ficers’ union contract.

Calls to adopt “duty to intervene” policies have gained momentum as protests over police
violence have gripped the nation. Other departments, such as North Carolina’s Charlot-
teMecklenburg Police Department, have already implemented such orders.

The Dallas department did not immediately say whether an officer could be punished for
not intervening.

In announcing the change, a police news release said the revision was made to ensure what
happened to Floyd “does not happen again,” noting that the three other officers in that
case did not step in.

“Had the officers intervened,” the release said, “the outcome might have been different.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200606/page/1/textview 4/4
