2020. 6. 18. Thunder season to resume July 31

Thunder season to resume July 31
NBA to resume season with 22 teams at Disney World

The Oklahoman « 5 Jun 2020 - A1- By Joe Mussatto Staff writer jmussatto@oklanoman.com

The NBA Board of Governors approved a tentative plan Thursday to resume the season
with 22 teams, including the Thunder, on July 31 at Disney World.

  

The formal step, which the league considers the first of many before basketball returns,
comes 85 days after the season was suspended when Rudy Gobert tested positive for the
coronavirus before a Thunder-Jazz game in Oklahoma City.

The NBA is working with the National Basketball Players Association to finalize a compre-
hensive restart plan, according to a league release.

“While the COVID-19 pandemic presents formidable challenges, we are hopeful of finish-
ing the season in a safe and responsible manner based on strict protocols now being final-
ized with public health officials and medical experts,” NBA Commissioner Adam Silver
said in a statement.

“We also recognize that as we prepare to resume play, our society is reeling from recent
tragedies of racial violence and injustice, and we will continue to work closely with our
teams and players to use our collective resources and influence to address these issues in
very real and concrete ways.”

The 16 teams currently slated to make the playoffs will be included in the restart format,
along with six teams that are six games or fewer behind the No. 8 seed in

their respective conferences. Thirteen of the 22 teams are from the Western Conference.
The restart plan calls for each team to play eight “seeding games” before the playoffs be-
gin. Those will count as regular-season games. There will be a possible play-in tourna-
ment for the eighth seed in both conferences if the ninth- place team is within

four games of the eighthplace team. The playoffs will proceed in a traditional intraconfer-
ence format with best-of-seven series in each round.

The Thunder (40-24) sits in fifth place in the West — 2 1/2 games behind the third-place
Nuggets and 11/2 games ahead of the seventh- place Mavericks. The Thunder could realis-
tically finish anywhere from third to seventh in the West.

The NBA announced that a team's eight seeding games will be selected from its remaining
regular season matchups.

No schedule has been confirmed, but the Thunder might face a slate that looks like this:
Jazz, Wizards, Grizzlies, Nuggets, Heat, Nuggets, Suns, Clippers.

In order, those were the next eight games — among the 22 teams that will be invited to
Disney World — on the Thunder's schedule before the season was suspended.

Plausible playoff opponents for the Thunder include the Clippers, Nuggets, Jazz, Rockets
and Mavericks.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/20200605/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. Thunder season to resume July 31

Players will be recalled to their professional markets later this month. Team training
camps will start June 30, and teams will fly to Orlando, Florida on July 7, according to mul-
tiple reports. There will be a quarantine period before the games begin July 31.

ESPN reported that the league is expected to house everyone in one hotel to create a “bub-
ble” environment without fans.

It's unclear who will be allowed in the bubble, and how strict access into or out of the bub-
ble will be.

There will be “daily, uniform coronavirus testing for everyone who is within the bubble,”
according to ESPN.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/20200605/page/1/textview 2/2
