2020. 6. 17. SEN. JOHN CORNYN

SEN. JOHN CORNYN
Second roundtable gathers after Trump’s

The Dallas Morning News - 13 Jun 2020 - 1A - By MARC RAMIREZ Staff Writer mramirez@dallasnews.com

and Dallas city leaders gather for a law enforcement roundtable.

7

|

    

Conceding the scope of the task ahead, Sen. John Cornyn and Dallas city leaders held a
roundtable discussion Friday to begin the process of rebuilding trust in law enforcement
locally and nationally in the wake of George Floyd’s killing last month.

“We're at a dangerous tipping point in our country,” Cornyn said. “We need to regain the
trust of the entire population in the people who put their lives on the line.”

However, the senator said, while it was his hope that “something good can come out of
this terrible tragedy,” he cautioned against acting too swiftly to institute needed reforms
despite the sense of urgency spurred by recent national unrest.

“When you’re angry, or afraid, you don’t always make the best decisions,” he said. “We
need to take a longerterm view. This problem did not start with George Floyd.”

The roundtable event, held at Dallas City Hall, included a dozen law enforcement and
community leaders invited by Mayor Eric Johnson, who described the issue of police bru-
tality as “a branch on the tree of racial injustice.” It came a day after President Donald
Trump visited Dallas and hosted his own roundtable on race and policing that did not in-
clude the top law enforcement officials in the city.

Friday’s exchange featured calls for improved police training in dispute resolution and de-
escalation techniques, as well as more social interaction between officers and the commu-
nities they serve.

‘‘As law enforcement officers, we have been given great responsibility, and we have to be
accountable for what we do,” Dallas County Sheriff Marian Brown said.

Some addressed the senator more directly, asking Cornyn to stand up to Trump’s “divi-
sive” rhetoric and refute the president’s insinuation on Thursday that police brutality was
limited to “a few bad apples.”

“You have to take a stronger role when it comes to the president’s rhetoric,” said Rene
Martinez, president of North Texas LULAC. “You’ve got to take that lead.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 3/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. SEN. JOHN CORNYN

Pastor Sammie Berry of Dallas West Church of Christ agreed. “Now is the time to speak up
and not be on the wrong side of history,” he said.

Cornyn demurred, saying he simply hoped “to set a tone that people will find construc-
tive.”

‘It’s uncomfortable’

The mayor said he had convened the participants knowing they wouldn’t all necessarily
agree on the path forward.

“We have to be willing to have our viewpoints challenged,” he said. “Policy change is not
something to be made in an echo chamber.”

What they could all agree on was that the status quo was unacceptable after a history of
police brutality brought to a head by Floyd’s very visible death.

‘‘We need to reach a point where we are comfortable having uncomfortable conversa-
tions,” Brown said. “Just like the masks we’re all wearing today — it’s uncomfortable, but
it’s something we have to do.”

Berry said the time for talk alone was over.

‘“‘We need to move away from theoretical discussions toward actual change,” he said. “We
have a culture that allows bad officers and encourages good officers to look the other way.”
Fred Frazier, first vice president of the Dallas Police Association, said the neck restraint
technique used by Minneapolis police officer Derek Chauvin had no place in law enforce-
ment, nor did the inaction of those who stood by as eight minutes and 46 seconds ticked
by.

“We have a duty to intervene as officers,” Frazier said.

Funding crucial

Dallas Police Chief U. Reneé Hall, meanwhile, suggested there could be “early warning sys-
tems” to alert police department supervisors of officers with multiple instances of mis-
conduct.

“We have to acknowledge that although many strides have been made to stamp out this
behavior, it exists systematically,” she said.

Deputy Mayor Pro Tem Adam Mcgough called for more funding for mental health issues,
which Dallas County District Attorney John Creuzot said are at the root of many criminal
trespass arrests.

Creuzot decried heavy policing in minority communities, which he said creates “a moral
imbalance” and “breeds a sense of distrust and mistrust.”

That blacks are disproportionately arrested for marijuana charges is why, he noted, his of-
fice had decided to no longer prosecute firsttime offenses — a measure he said had saved
the county about $200,000 in 2019.

Officers might spend as long as four hours booking someone into jail for a small amount of
marijuana, he said — hours that could be better spent on other police work.

National police registry

Cornyn did cite two things he hoped to achieve at the federal level after the day’s discus-
sion, including the compilation of a national registry of “bad officers” so that those culpa-
ble of misconduct don’t simply move on to other departments.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 3/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. SEN. JOHN CORNYN

He also said he hoped to convene experts to address Congress about best practices in law
enforcement that could help influence national reform.

After the roundtable, Cornyn reiterated his opposition to renaming Fort Hood and other
Army bases named for Confederate generals. And in regards to the snub of local black law
enforcement officials who were not invited by President Trump to the town hall in Dallas
on Thursday, he said: “I don’t know who the White House did and didn’t invite. I think we
need to hear from everybody.”

Tough discussions like Friday’s roundtable, he said, are necessary for law enforcement re-
form to progress, he said.

“This is not the end,” Cornyn said. “We will continue to work together and hopefully heal
our country.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 3/page/1/textview 3/3
