2020. 6. 16. Summer without swimming: Many families will sorely miss pools.

Summer without swimming: Many families will sorely miss
pools.

Virus dealing extra blow to families whose season centers on swimming

The Washington Post : 25 May 2020 - A1 - BY MICHAEL S. ROSENWALD AND IAN SHAPIRA

Cynthia Brandt Campagna, the president of the Kemp Mill Swim Club in Silver Spring, typ-
ically spends the days before Memorial Day weekend getting her pool ready for the hun-
dreds of families eager to take their first plunge into summer.

 

She makes sure the pool deck is swept, the furniture is scrubbed, no leaves float in the wa-
ter. And when the gates swing open, “We’re packed,” Campagna said. “People stay all day
long.”

This week Campagna wondered whether her pool will even open this summer.

After shutting down schools, malls and so many other staples of daily life, the coronavirus
pandemic is coming for summer, with public pools and private swim clubs around the re-
gion delaying or outright scrapping plans to open facilities as health officials worry about
their safety.

In greater Washington, where cannonballs and neighborhood swim team rivalries are a
rite of summer, the uncertainty has left families with an existential question: Can it really
be summer if there is no place to swim?

“We don’t send our kids to camp in summer, we send them to the pool,” said Marcie
Ament, a

Rockville mother of six. “That’s what we do in summer. We love it. That’s our life.”

Now that life is in doubt. Public and private pools have been notifying families that pools
won’t open for the season, if at all, until state and local authorities deem them safe and
strict social distancing restrictions are put in place. With nowhere for neighborhood swim
teams to practice and restrictions likely to include limits on the number of swimmers in
pools and even lanes, leagues in Maryland and Northern Virginia have canceled their sea-
sons.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200525/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 16. Summer without swimming: Many families will sorely miss pools.

Water parks are closed, too. Last week, the Northern Virginia Regional Park Authority said
it was closing — for the entire summer — its five water parks that annually draw about
300,000 visitors, according to Paul Gilbert, the agency’s executive director. The parks are
the Atlantis in Centreville, Great Waves in Alexandria, Ocean Dunes in Arlington, Pirate’s
Cove in Lorton and Volcano Island in Sterling.

Every year, people flock to the parks for their combination of attractions — “speed” slides,
a 500-gallon dumping bucket and a 17,500-square-foot wave pool where people can body
surf.

But Gilbert said his agency had no choice but to close them down for the season. Given the
imperatives of social distancing and the uncertainty about when and how Virginia might
allow water parks and community pools to open, it didn’t make financial sense. The parks,
which together cost about $2.3 million to operate, need high volumes of visitors each year
and require intense lifeguard training and large numbers of staff.

The Fairfax County Park Authority also closed all of its recreation centers and its three
outdoor pool facilities: the Water Mine Family Swimmin’ Hole in Reston, Our Special Har-
bor Spray Park in Alexandria and the Martin Luther King Jr. pool in Alexandria. Similar de-
cisions were made in Prince William County. The obstacles were many. “We hire several
thousand seasonal workers, and if we don’t do the hiring now, we’re not going to have the
staff for later in the summer even if we’re allowed to open,” said Judith Pederson, a
spokeswoman for the Fairfax Park Authority. “We have real issues with social distancing.
How can you do that in a water park when people are floating on tubes in a lazy river?”
Indoor competitive swimming has also fallen victim. In the District, Robert Green, the
head coach of the DC Wave Swim Team, which is organized under the D.C. Parks and Re-
creation Department, said all meets and practices have been canceled. The decision has
been especially hard on the members of his team trying to maintain their fitness and boost
their times.

“Even if we were able to have one or two practices a week, that would go a long way in
terms of their fitness and mental health,” he said. “We've got juniors and rising seniors
who are trying to get recruited by colleges, and their windows are closing. The more time
out of the water, the less opportunities they have.”

One of his swimmers, Jasmine Barry, 17, a rising senior at Bethesda- Chevy Chase High
School, said she is hoping to swim for a Division 1 program such as UNLV, Kansas, LSU or
Georgia Tech. On a normal day, she’d get up about 4 a.m., make it to the pool in Takoma
Park by 4:45 a.m. and then swim for a couple hours before racing back to school.

Now, she’s walking her dog, Candy, a German shepherd, eight to 10 miles a day. She runs,
but she doesn’t like “on-land” workouts as much.

“It’s been tough mentally,” Barry said. “I really can’t remember a time without swim-
ming.”

Local officials and health experts said they understand the frustration for families and es-
pecially children, who have lost so much during the pandemic already and now might not
have a place to swim this summer.

“But the most important thing is the safety of those kids,” said Clark Beil, a Montgomery
County official who oversees the licensing and regulation of the county’s pools. “While it’s

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200525/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 16. Summer without swimming: Many families will sorely miss pools.

an inconvenience that kids can’t get into the pool and swim, we have to make sure it is
safe.”

But that’s a complicated task. Morteza Abbaszadegan, a professor of environmental mi-
crobiology and director of the National Science Foundation Water and Environmental
Technology Center at Arizona State University in Tempe, said the coronavirus doesn’t
transmit through chlorinated water and chlorine viruses.

“If someone goes in the water and swims and nobody’s around them, they’! be fine,” he
said. “But if there’s a large crowd coming to a pool and they’re not in the water and they’re
touching chairs and tables, the facility could be a potentially hazardous area.”

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention says on its website there is “no evidence
that Covid-19 can spread to people through the water used in pools, hot tubs, or water
playgrounds.” The agency also says that proper operation and disinfection should kill the
coronavirus.

If community pools do open, they won’t operate like they did in pre-pandemic times.
Tony Poole, the board president of the Highlands Swim and Tennis Club in Mclean, said his
club will probably require people to make appointments, arrive in shifts and park their be-
longings in designated areas spaced more than six feet apart.

Campagna, of the Kemp Mill Swim Club, said the company that manages her pool was
working on similar protocols.

For some, these restrictions will be a sad reminder of how upended their lives have be-
come.

Laurian Eckle, who runs a consulting business in Arlington, said she and her husband and
children are crushed that their time at the Overlee pool in Arlington won’t be the same as
normal. Her son, Carter, 11, is on the swim team, and her daughter, Abigail, 13, is on the
synchronized swim team. They typically walk from their home to Overlee four to five days
a week. A couple of times a summer, Overlee hosts social nights offering free scoops of ice
cream, crab feasts for adults or a parent-free kids night.

Right now, Overlee anticipates opening in late May at the start of the region’s Phase 1 re-
opening. But even then, the pool will only allow adult lap swimming in 3ominute reserved
sessions, with no daily guests allowed. Later, when Phase 2 starts, the pool will allow fam-
ilies inside but perhaps with reserved time slots and with far fewer people than normal,
according to the organization’s website.

“T know that Overlee is doing all they can for us, and I respect the board’s decisions, but
we’re all a bit heartbroken and disappointed,” Eckle said. “We normally spend a signifi-
cant time at the pool, and now we don’t know if we’ll go at all.”

“We normally spend a significant time at the pool, and now we don’t know if we'll go at
all.”

Laurian Eckle, who says that her family is crushed that their time at the Overlee pool in Ar-
lington won’t be the same as normal

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200525/page/1/textview 3/3
