2020. 6. 17. Small-business aid: After a rocky start, the program gains speed.

Small-business aid: After a rocky start, the program gains
speed.

The Washington Post - 10 Jun 2020 - Ai - BY JONATHAN O'CONNELL, JEANNE WHALEN, JEFF STEIN AND ERICA
WERNER jonathan.oconnell@washpost.com jeanne.whalen@washpost.com jeffrey.stein@washpost.com
erica.werner@washpost.com

Once beset by a flood of complaints, balky computer systems, changed rules and frantic
calls to the Treasury Department, the federal government’s small-business Paycheck Pro-
tection Program is suddenly looking like a measured success.

 

The U.S. economy buckled in March and April amid the coronavirus pandemic, but it ap-
peared to regain some of its footing in May, adding 2.5 million jobs. The economy remains
extremely weak, with a high unemployment rate and a surge in Americans seeking assis-
tance. Many economists say conditions will remain shaky for at least another year.

But they also say things would be even worse without the giant loan forgiveness program,
which Sen. Marco Rubio (R-fla.) shepherded through Congress and then helped defend
during chaotic weeks of implementation.

Getting to this point strained the government, the banking industry and small businesses,
with many missteps and pivots along the way as they tried to build a program from
scratch. And the Trump administration vacillated wildly between trying to rush money out
the door and then trying to tighten rules, enraging lawmakers such as Rubio, confusing
borrowers and nearly overwhelming banks, even those with small-business expertise.

“It was like saying, ‘I want my locally owned farmers market to work like Walmart or
Amazon,’ ” said Alicia Wade of Oklahoma City’s Valliance Bank, which processed 178 loans
the first weekend the fund opened. “It’s not feasible.”

Arocky start

Confusion engulfed the program from the outset.

One week before the program began, a bank lobbyist group wrote to the Treasury Depart-
ment warning of a major flaw.

Treasury was not planning to waive strict criminal penalties for lenders who did not thor-
oughly vet their new customers. The banking group warned that leaving the rules in place
would require a level of vetting they couldn’t quickly provide.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200610/page/1/textview 116
2020. 6. 17. Small-business aid: After a rocky start, the program gains speed.

“As currently envisioned, Cares Act funding will only be provided to banks’ current legal
entity customers,” stated the letter, which was obtained by The Washington Post. The PPP
was established as part of the $2 trillion Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security
(Cares) Act.

When the PPP began accepting applications on April 3, the bank lobbyists’ prediction
proved true. Rather than covering all businesses that qualified, much of the funding went
first to the customers the banks already knew and trusted — including large corporations
— igniting a public firestorm that outraged tens of thousands of business owners still des-
perately awaiting funding.

This created a logistical and public relations nightmare, with many smaller companies
sidelined while larger firms found easy access to the money. Treasury had to make re-
peated changes to the program and eventually ask Congress for more money before many
of the problems were ironed out.

Two months later, the PPP has directed more than $530 billion to 4.5 million companies.
Economists, business leaders, White House officials and lawmakers from both parties
think it helped stabilize the economy. Because the government has released no detailed in-
formation about how many jobs the program has saved, it’s still unclear whether it
achieved its primary goal of apportioning the lion’s share of the money to workers.

The program is about to enter a new stage, as many of the companies that received loans
will begin applying for loan forgiveness to determine whether they have to repay the
money. The program will also face its first congressional hearing on Wednesday, when Ru-
bio will call Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin, who had appeared skeptical about creat-
ing the program while the legislation was being drafted, and Small Business Association
head Jovita Carranza to testify.

Rubio said in an interview that part of his inquiry will focus on “some early regulatory de-
cisions, made or not made, that could have provided a little bit of clarity on the front end
and sort of prevented some of the issues that happened.”

‘If [had atime machine...’

Many of the Paycheck Protection Program’s initial problems can be traced to its hurried
creation in the frenzied days and nights of negotiation that led to the passage of the Cares
Act, which was rushed together at breakneck speed to arrest the economy’s sudden free-
fall.

Congress created the program in March with very loose restrictions, an attempt to give the
Trump administration flexibility to spray billions of dollars across the economy as quickly
as possible to try to contain a tidal wave of layoffs.

The Small Business Administration, the government’s smallest Cabinet-level agency,
didn’t post the rules for the program until the night before it went live, a day when 1,363
people died of the coronavirus and the numbers were on the rise. At agency headquarters
on launch day, the SBA’S software for processing applications repeatedly malfunctioned,
creating a massive backlog. Large banks, leery of inadvertently misusing taxpayer money,
waited for more clarity from the government before they started lending. Community
bankers asked staff members to work overtime, but even the most successful ones say it
was nowhere near enough.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200610/page/1/textview 2/6
2020. 6. 17. Small-business aid: After a rocky start, the program gains speed.

Although the program was designed so companies with 500 or fewer employees could tap
up to $10 million in forgivable loans, it was soon clear much bigger companies could access
the program, as large chains including Ruth’s Chris Steak House began announcing in se-
curities filings that they had received millions in funding.

As one report after another came out about large, public firms getting money, the National
Federation of Independent Business asked policymakers to “put an immediate halt to this
nonsense.”

“Publicly traded companies did not access this money on their own,” the group said April
27. “The legislation lacked strong guardrails, leaving an opening for big business, and al-
lowing large financial institutions to help their bigger clients access money intended for
real small businesses.”

Facing public backlash about concerns that large companies were taking taxpayer money,
Mnuchin urged well-capitalized businesses to return the money they had received and said
all loans over $2 million would be audited.

The administration was also forced to ask Congress for more money, and lawmakers
agreed to an additional $310 billion in April as part of a larger bill that tried to ensure more
of the money went to minority-owned businesses and underserved communities.

Rubio and Sen. Ben Cardin (D-MD.), two sponsors of the program, say there are things
they would have done differently. Although the first $349 billion allocated was more than
initial drafts of the legislation called for, Rubio said that in retrospect, it’s clear the pro-
gram should have been funded at a higher level to begin with. That first pool of money was
gone after just 13 days, leaving thousands of small-business owners struggling and furious
with policymakers. More than 100,000 small businesses have closed permanently.

Cardin said Congress’s intent was for large chains to be able to get only one loan totaling
$10 million, not multiple loans exceeding that amount, as happened in a some instances.
Rubio said, in hindsight, Congress should have given the administration more direct in-
structions, including the percentage of the loan that had to go to payroll.

“Tf I had a time machine and could have seen everything that happened, we probably
would have been more specific, and some of the things that there was regulatory uncer-
tainty about, that ultimately we had to wait for guidance from Treasury to write rules
about, I think in hindsight, we probably would have been more specific about,” he said.
The dash for cash

After starting with too little money, the PPP now appears to have too much, as more than
$130 billion has gone unspent for more than a month. The slowdown in borrowing re-
quired additional changes to loosen the rules. Last week, President Trump signed into law
a new piece of legislation that extends the amount of time companies have to use the loans
and have them forgiven from eight weeks to 24 weeks.

When the program began, the nation’s tourism and entertainment sectors had been
mostly shut down for three weeks, as sports arenas, museums and concert venues had
closed en masse in mid-march.

Small-business owners logged into their banks’ websites from the backs of their darkened
restaurants and the empty lobbies of their hotels. Many of them had no income. Some had
sent their employees home, unable to pay them any longer.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200610/page/1/textview 3/6
2020. 6. 17. Small-business aid: After a rocky start, the program gains speed.

“We started seeing massive cancellations coming in,” said Katen Patel, who owns an
Econo Lodge, Best Western and other hotels in Oregon. He laid off 70 percent of his staff,
who became part of about 4 million hospitality workers in the country who lost their jobs.
In the six days between the signing of the $2 trillion Cares Act and the morning that lend-
ing began, Small Business Administration leaders asked Robert Scott, Great Lakes regional
administrator, to come to Washington to serve as director of a “war room” overseeing the
rollout.

The SBA is used to providing aid to businesses after localized natural disasters. The cross-
country scale of the coronavirus crisis was an entirely different sort of disaster. For several
nights as the program got underway, Scott said he and colleagues, including Carranza, an
SBA veteran and former UPS executive, stayed in the office until 3 or 4 a.m.

The plan was to cede much of the underwriting and approval process to banks, which
would accept applications from their customers and then forward qualifying borrowers to
SBA for processing. The agency’s E-tran software was supposed to quickly vet the applica-
tions for duplicates or overdue SBA debts, then approve them.

When the system is working, said Steve Bulger, administrator of the SBA’S Atlantic Region
and acting administrator for its MidAtlantic Region, “it’s a matter of a few seconds and ‘
boom,’ that application goes back out.”

But the rollout was anything but smooth. Staff members, led by a crew of 10 to 15 socially
distanced officials on the seventh floor of the agency’s Washington headquarters, didn’t
finish the rules until the night before the program’s launch, sending details to the public at
6:40 p.m. Thursday.

The delay prompted many big banks not to accept applications for hours the next morning,
even as their customers rushed to get to the front of the line for money they’d been told
was to be given on a first-come, first-served basis.

In district SBA offices nationwide, the normal call volume quickly quadrupled. C. J. Castro,
who runs the SBA office in Tampa, said even his cellphone “started ringing at 7 in the
morning and it didn’t stop till 10 o’clock at night” for weeks afterward.

“When you hear folks on the other line in tears, and they don’t know where to go, it leaves
an impression,” Castro said.

Desperate pleas for help

E-tran, which normally vets loans from about 1,700 agency-approved lenders, was sud-
denly being asked to vet loans from close to 5,000 lenders. (More than 5,400 are currently
approved.) Banks nationwide complained that E-tran kept crashing, preventing all of the
newly registered lenders from entering applicants into the government system for final
approval.

After a long wait, some business owners got frustrated and applied with a smaller lender,
only to be told by E-tran that they were already in the system with an approved loan from
the original bank, which hadn’t yet told them or disbursed the money, Castro said.

Eric Terrell, senior manager at the SBA office in Memphis, started getting 120 calls a day,
many from panicked entrepreneurs who hadn’t heard from their banks after applying.
“You get phone calls from business owners who are crying, all the savings they had have
run out,” Terrell said. “You get other people, they’re so upset they use profanity. And I un-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200610/page/1/textview 4/6
2020. 6. 17. Small-business aid: After a rocky start, the program gains speed.

derstand.”

By April 16, the first $349 billion was gone. For the SBA, it was a pace many times greater
than it usually operated. In a typical year, the agency approves $25 billion in such loans;
since April 3, it has approved about $530 billion.

Within days of the fund running dry, another problem emerged, as dozens of publicly
traded companies reported receiving money. Autonation, a Fortune 500 network of car
dealerships, applied for dozens of loans from its Florida headquarters and received at least
$77 million. Ashford Group, a Dallas-based owner of 130 hotels, received at least $76 mil-
lion.

It remains unclear how many large hotel and restaurant chains may have taken advantage
of the program, but publicly traded firms in all received more than $1 billion in funding.
The government has largely refused to disclose any beneficiaries of the program and has
not said how much has been returned.

In an interview, Carranza acknowledged the frustration from Rubio and Cardin with get-
ting data about the performance of the program, but said the priority had been getting
money out the door to businesses.

“Senator Rubio and Senator Cardin wanted those funds in the hands of small businesses
rapidly. And so that was my focus,” Carranza said, adding data integrity was also impor-
tant and she tried to provide information to the Small Business Committee as fast as pos-
sible. After the outcry, it fell to Treasury officials to resolve the problem.

Lawmakers initially planned to approve even less money for the program, with early drafts
calling for $100 billion, according to three people aware of internal discussions who spoke
on the condition of anonymity to share details of the private negotiations.

Mnuchin appeared either lukewarm or skeptical about the effort and was more focused on
the loan programs for airlines and large corporations during the drafting of the legislation,
two of these people said. Publicly, Mnuchin has heralded the program as a successful an-
swer to the nation’s greatest downturn since the Great Depression.

After the problems began to arise, the Treasury Department issued a stream of changing
and sometimes confusing new rules.

Constant pressure, changes

Mnuchin was under constant pressure from Capitol Hill to make changes. Sen. Susan
Collins (R-maine) has complained to him in private phone calls about Treasury’s changing
guidance on whether firms will face audits and potential sanctions if they misuse the
money, said two people aware of the conversations who spoke on the condition of
anonymity to share private conversations. (Collins declined to comment about this
through a spokesperson.)

The inadequate size of the funding created further problems. Fearful that the money would
run out quickly, the administration had created a new requirement — one not specified in
the legislation Congress approved — stipulating that firms could receive loan forgiveness
only if 75 percent of the aid went to maintaining payrolls at precrisis levels. The rest had to
be spent on utilities, rent or mortgage interest. (Last week, this rule was changed and the
new ratio is 60/40.)

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200610/page/1/textview 5/6
2020. 6. 17. Small-business aid: After a rocky start, the program gains speed.

That meant many firms could not take the loans with confidence that they would be for-
given. Restaurants that were still open for takeout and delivery needed cash to pay food
suppliers, but realized if they used PPP money for those expenses, they would be forced to
pay that portion back, without knowing when they could return to business as usual. And
with their businesses closed for sitdown service, they didn’t need 100 percent of their staff
back on the payroll, restaurateurs said.

Lobbyists for the restaurants immediately took their complaints to the White House and
the Treasury Department, but without success. Now, about one third of food service and
accommodation businesses have less than one month of cash left, said Adam Ozimek, chief
economist at Upwork, putting as many as 3 million restaurant jobs at risk.

“It was frankly inexplicable, that they’d take that approach because it directly contradicts
the program’s intended flexibility,” said John Lettieri, president and chief executive of the
Economic Innovation Group, a nonpartisan public policy organization. “It works better for
least-affected employers and worse for the most affected, which is perverse.”

Some who were skeptical of the program early on have changed their tune. Despite criti-
cizing the way public companies tapped into it, NFIB considers the program a “qualified
success,” said Kevin Kuhlman, the group’s vice president of federal government relations.
Wade, the Oklahoma City banker, said her staff worked 14-hour days when PPP began. She
said she was hoarse by the end of the first week, after going through applications with car-
penters, contractors, restaurant owners and dozens of others.

All in all, she said, “I believe the program has worked, regardless of its ease of use.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200610/page/1/textview 6/6
