2020. 6. 17. Classical music station WRRFM (101.1) seeks to provide ‘a calm oasis’ in challenging times.

Classical music station WRRFM (101.1) seeks to provide ‘a
calm oasis’ in challenging times.

WRR builds connections for listeners sheltering in place

The Dallas Morning News - 12 Jun 2020 - 1A - By TIM DIOVANNI Staff Writer tim.diovanni@dallasnews.com

In this time of pandemic isolation, WRRFM (101.1) — the classical music station owned by
the city of Dallas — has been nurturing a listening community over the airwaves.

Ne

  
  

 

Ue OLS, 7

“We've tried to be a calm oasis during these challenging times,” says the station’s general
manager, Mike Oakes. Playlists have mainly focused on relaxing and uplifting works, in-
cluding Chopin nocturnes and preludes and chamber music by Mozart. “We are trying to
stay away from stuff that’s dark or too dramatic.”

The calming atmosphere is created not just by the music, but also the announcers, Oakes
says. “We’re the place where listeners come when they need a break from the news.”
Admittedly, classical music stations have sometimes taken criticism for advertising pro-
gramming as soothing and refreshing. A 2018 article titled “Alltooeasy listening” by
Jennifer Gersten for

argues that this strategy overlooks the broad range of emotions that the music can evoke.
Still,

relaxation might be what people need right now.

Steve Susi, a listener from Plano, finds that tuning in to the station helps reduce his stress
and blood pressure. Susi regularly listens to WRR’S broadcasts of Through the Night With
Peter Van de Graaff and Exploring Music With Bill Mcglaughlin — both network programs
— and At Work With Amy, hosted by Amy Bishop, director of marketing and promotions.
“T think she has the perfect voice for a classical music station. It’s so effortlessly soothing
and relaxing,” Susi says of Bishop. “It enhances whatever music she is going to play at that

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 2/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Classical music station WRRFM (101.1) seeks to provide ‘a calm oasis’ in challenging times.

time.”

Although he has been at home by himself, Susi says that he never actually feels alone be-
cause of the presence of the WRR announcers on the other end.

Medical field music

Recently, WRR has been designing thematic programming for its Big One at 1, a weekday
special showcasing complete works (typically concertos and symphonies). The week of
April 13 focused on pieces of triumphant optimism, including Mahler’s Second Symphony
and Beethoven’s Ninth, and the week of May 11 highlighted composers with connections to
the medical field.

Swedish composer Franz Berwald, who earned a living as an orthopedist, was represented
by his Fourth Symphony. WRR also featured Alexander Borodin’s First Symphony. In addi-
tion to being a composer, Borodin worked as a doctor and chemist.

“Right now, so many of us are realizing the importance of our first responders and our
medical professionals,” says Bishop, who curated this weeklong programming to mark the
occasion of International Nurses Day, which was on May 12. “That was our way of doing
what we could musically to show them some love.”

Local connections

Usually, WRR broadcasts recent performances by the Dallas and Fort Worth symphonies
and the Dallas Winds on its weekly Monday Night at the Symphony program.

But because these local groups haven’t performed live concerts since March, they have
provided the station with archival materials. On May 11, WRR broadcast a recording of a
Dallas Winds concert from 2013, which consisted mainly of music from science fiction
films, while the Dallas Winds hosted a live chat on its Youtube page.

WRR has also featured performances from important moments in the history of area en-
sembles, including Jaap Van Zweden’s last concert as music director of the DSO and Fabio
Luisi’s final performance with the DSO before being named music director in 2018.

The station, with studios in Fair Park, played a recording of Gounod’s Faust on June 6 from
current Dallas Opera music director Emmanuel Villaume’s company debut in 1998. An-
other partnership with the opera falls on July 11, when the station will broadcast a 2004
recording of Verdi’s La Traviata, starring Sondra Radvanovsky as Violetta and conducted
by former music director Graeme Jenkins.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 2/page/1/textview 2/2
