2020. 6. 17. Study on malaria drugs retracted

Study on malaria drugs retracted

Questionable data led to conclusion that pills were unsafe, halted WHO
study

The Dallas Morning News - 5 Jun 2020 - 1A - By MARILYNN MARCHIONE

Authors retract a major study that found malaria drug dangers for COVID19 patients.
Three authors of a large study that raised safety concerns about malaria drugs for
coronavirus patients have retracted the report, saying they could “no longer vouch for the
veracity of the primary data sources.”

The retraction Thursday in The Lancet involved a May 22 report on hydroxychloroquine
and chloroquine, drugs long used for preventing or treating malaria but whose safety and
effectiveness for treating COVID19 are unknown.

The study leaders also retracted an earlier report on blood pressure drugs published by The
New England Journal of Medicine. That study, which used the same company’s database,
suggested that widely used blood pressure medicines were safe for coronavirus patients, a
conclusion some other studies also have reached.

The Lancet study, purportedly based on the health records of more than 96,000 patients
and 671 hospitals on six continents, found that hospitalized COVID19 patients treated with
the antimalarial drugs had a much higher risk of death and heart problems than those who
did not receive the drug. The study was “observational,” which is less rigorous than a ran-
domized, placebocontrolled clinical trial.

“Not only is there no benefit, but we saw a very consistent signal of harm,” the study
leader, Dr. Mandeep Mehra of Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston, said when the
work was published.

Its conclusion led the World Health Organization to temporarily stop use of hydroxy-
chloroquine in a study it was leading, and for French officials to stop allowing its use in
hospitals there. Earlier this week, WHO said experts who reviewed safety information de-
cided that its study could resume.

The drugs have been controversial because President Donald Trump repeatedly promoted
their use and took hydroxychloroquine himself to try to prevent infection. The drugs are
known to have potential side effects, especially heart rhythm problems.

The Lancet study relied on a database from a Chicago company, Surgisphere. Its founder,
Dr. Sapan Desai, is one of the authors.

The Lancet’s notice said “there are many outstanding questions about Surgisphere and the
data that were allegedly included in this study,” and “institutional reviews of Surgi-
sphere’s research collaborations are urgently needed.”

Desai and Surgisphere did not immediately respond to request for comments.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200605/page/1/textview 4/1
