2020. 6. 17. French beach open: A city created ‘static beaches’ for sunbathers.

French beach open: A city created ‘static beaches’ for sun-
bathers.

La Grande-motte creates highly regulated stretches of sand

The Washington Post - 29 May 2020 - A1 - BY OLIVIER LAURENT AND SANDRA MEHL olivier.laurent@washpost.com

The sand is divided into 75 squares, marked off by stakes and ropes. Spots must be booked
in advance and have a three-hour limit. With those constraints, the French resort town of
La Grande-motte has launched an experiment in social distancing-compliant sunbathing.

‘| 1 1
weigaritohdtps ae, be ELS
| af |
|
'

= e P ‘ nica Pbed
’ a. Ni

 

For weeks, France’s 3,500 miles of beaches lay empty, closed off to limit the spread of the
coronavirus in a country that has experienced more than 28,000 deaths. On May 16, a few
days after the French government started lifting confinement orders, most of these
beaches reopened to the public, but only for exercise. Walking, running and swimming are
okay, reclining on a blanket for hours is not. People generally have to keep moving.

But La Grande-motte, a town near Montpellier renowned for its homogenous architecture,
came up with a way to offer a “static beach” experience that stays within national rules.
It's a highly regulated affair. Bookings must be made on the municipality’s website. The
beach closes at lunch time for a safe turnover. Security guards man the entrance. “That
makes for a strange feeling of an extraordinary experience,” said Martin Gauthe, who
came to the beach with his wife, Christine, from Clapiers, on the outskirts of Montpellier.
“Plus, it’s nice, we’re not on top of each other, and most importantly, we can see the hori-
zon.”

“It’s strange, we don’t really know what we can and can’t do yet. But it’s a great joy to be

here, to breathe the sea air,” said Sofia Belkenadil, 24, who came to the beach with her sis-
https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200529/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. French beach open: A city created ‘static beaches’ for sunbathers.

ter, Kenza. “During the confinement, we stayed at home, and we had a tragedy: Our grand-
father died of the coronavirus. We couldn’t visit him at the hospital or even call him. And at
the funeral, only seven of us could be with him. Since we were confined, we couldn’t even
go out afterward to take our minds off it. We were alone with ourselves, so being here to-
day is great. We’re savoring the moment.”

Joelle Leboffe and her children, Cassandra and Nicholas, have been living in Castelnau-
leLez, on the outskirts of Montpellier, for a year, after moving from London. “We’re happy
to finally be able to put our towels on the sand and to be able to swim according to the
rules. My husband is Italian. I spoke to my in-laws on the phone yesterday and they can’t
swim yet. And my husband, who still lives in London for his work, is still under confine-
ment. We realize how lucky we are.”

On Tuesday, France will enter the second phase of its planned reopening and loosen re-
strictions on all its beaches. But, amid fears of a second wave of infections, other towns on
France’s coasts may adopt La Grande-motte’s singular experiment.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200529/page/1/textview 2/2
