2020. 6. 17. More shopping options

More shopping options
Chain is assessing permanent store closures in bankruptcy reorganizing

The Dallas Morning News - 29 May 2020 - 1A - By MARIA HALKIAS Staff Writer mhalkias@dallasnews.com

Planobased J.C. Penney, which filed for bankruptcy this month, plans to have 500 stores
open by Wednesday.

J.C. Penney said its stores are reopening at a faster pace now, and it has asked all of its
store landlords for abatements on rent.

The Planobased department store chain, which filed for bankruptcy this month, said
Thursday that it has opened 150 more stores and has 304 open in 27 states.

At a hearing Thursday, Penney’s attorney Joshua Sussberg of Kirkland & Ellis said the
company plans to begin permanent store closings in June. The process will take 12 to 14
weeks, and Penney is hoping to capture the backtoschool season with sales at stores that
are closing, he said.

A smaller second batch of store closings will start in July.

Sussberg said that so far, as its stores reopen, Penney’s sales are down 39%, which is as
good or better than what many competitors have reported.

Penney plans to have 500 stores, or 60% of its 846 locations, open by Wednesday. The
company hasn’t disclosed which stores it plans to close as part of its bankruptcy reorgani-
zation but did say in its preliminary business plan that more than 200 stores could close
permanently.

Sussberg said Cushman & Wakefield is appraising all of Penney’s properties. Earlier as-
sessments were done “in a vacuum and don’t account for where we are today.”

The company is trying to maximize what it can get for its property to raise the money it
will need to exit bankruptcy, Sussberg said. The goal is to have as small a loan as possible
to emerge from Chapter 11, he said.

Penney has also asked its landlords to defer rent for June and July and has asked for rent
abatements for June, July and August, Sussberg said. B. Riley Financial is helping Penney
work with its landlords.

In North Texas, Penney stores have reopened in Arlington, Burleson, Cedar Hill, Denton,
Fairview,

Fort Worth (Alliance), Frisco, Hurst, Mesquite, Plano, Rockwall, Sherman, Waxahachie
and Weatherford.

Stores that haven’t yet reopened are in Dallas, Flower Mound, Fort Worth (Ridgmar),
Greenville and Lewisville.

Penney and most retailers started slowly reopening stores in early May, some with just
curbside service of online purchases. All of Penney’s stores had been temporarily closed
since midmarch, sending the retailer, which had been trying to refinance its debt and had
made some progress on its turnaround, into bankruptcy court.

“We are so grateful to our associates for helping us navigate through this environment as
we build on our long history and continue the J.C. Penney story,” said Jim Depaul, execu-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200529/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. More shopping options

tive vice president of stores at Penney.

Penney is requiring its employees to wear protective gear and is providing them with
masks and gloves. Store shifts are being staggered to minimize employee contact and to
clean stores more often.

Apparel and department stores have followed the lead of the grocery stores that stayed
open throughout the pandemic stayathome period. Penney has added Plexiglas shields to
its checkout areas and is offering contactless checkout from customers’ phones via bar-
codes.

The stores are also designating Wednesday and Friday from 11 a.m. to noon as shopping
times for atrisk customers such as senior citizens, pregnant women and others with health
concerns.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200529/page/1/textview 2/2
