2020. 6. 17. Federal aid: Mnuchin, top, loosens rules for small businesses.

Federal aid: Mnuchin, top, loosens rules for small busi-
nesses.

Borrowers to remain secret under aid program, secretary says

The Washington Post - 11 Jun 2020 - Ai - BY JONATHAN O’CONNELL jonathan.oconnell@washpost.com

Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin told Congress on Wednesday that he has continued to
loosen the rules of the Paycheck Protection Program to make sure the vast majority of bor-
rowers will have at least some of their loans forgiven but that he does not plan on ever re-
leasing the names of borrowers to the public.

 

The Small Business Administration typically discloses names of borrowers from the loan
program on which the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) is based. But Mnuchin said he
won't be doing the same with the PPP, despite a rocky rollout in which dozens of publicly
held companies received millions of dollars in loans.

“We believe that that’s proprietary information, and in many cases for sole proprietors
and small businesses, it is confidential information,” Mnuchin testified before the Senate
Committee on Small Business and Entrepreneurship.

Senators of both parties credited the nearly $700 billion program, which was created in
March, with driving down unemployment. Despite extensive problems with the program’s
launch, Sen. Marco Rubio (R-fla.) said that without the program “tens of millions of
Americans would have been permanently separated from their livelihoods.” Officials have
not released any data to confirm these projections, however.

Days before the hearing, the Labor Department announced that the United States gained
2.5 million jobs in May, a far better outcome than experts had predicted and one that low-
ered the unemployment rate to 13.3 percent.

“We would have faced the extinction of small business as we know it,” said Rubio, the
committee chairman.

While the program ran out of the first $349 billion it was designated in just 13 days, re-
cently it has a new problem: Employers aren’t borrowing from it much anymore. Over $130
billion remains untapped in the second round of funding. This has prompted Congress and

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200611/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Federal aid: Mnuchin, top, loosens rules for small businesses.

President Trump to loosen the rules again, extending the period in which the funds must
be spent from eight to 24 weeks, to help industries still struggling mightily such as restau-
rants and hotels.

Borrowers are now focused on making sure that the loans they received will be forgiven,
effectively turning them into grants. Originally the program rules — written to ensure that
money went to workers — required that borrowers spend 75 percent of their funds on pay-
roll to have their loans forgiven.

Last week that threshold was reduced to 60 percent, and Mnuchin confirmed to Rubio
early in the hearing that even borrowers who spend less than that on payroll will be eligible
for partial loan forgiveness, so long as 60 percent of the amount forgiven went to payroll.
That would allow, for instance, a borrower who received $10,000 in funds and spent
$3,000 on payroll to be eligible to have $5,000 forgiven, depending on other factors.

As a result of recent rule changes, Mnuchin said he expects to see a jump in applications
from business owners who had been on the sidelines. Small Business Administration Ad-
ministrator Jovita Carranza testified that “we don’t have actual numbers at SBA” regard-
ing new applicants to the program but that businesses appreciated the changes.

Despite the program’s constantly changing rules, lawmakers and administration officials
are in agreement on the loosening restrictions because the country’s economic situation
remains so dire. Despite the jump in jobs during May, 21 million people remain out of
work, and the country’s unemployment rate of 13.3 percent is higher than any period since
the Great Depression.

Even though $130 billion in the PPP remains, Mnuchin also voiced support for another leg-
islative stimulus package, saying that restaurants and hotels in particular seem to be in
need of further support.

“T definitely think we are going to need another bipartisan legislation to put more money
into the economy,” he said.

House Democrats have proposed a roughly $3 trillion spending package, which would pro-
vide more aid for states and cities, among other things. Senate Republicans and the White
House have rejected the plan and have said they want more time to decide how to proceed.
Mnuchin also weighed in on an issue that has divided Republicans related to a large in-
crease in unemployment benefits that the White House and Congress approved in March.
Some Republicans have said the extra $600per-week benefit created disincentives for
people to come to work, and they want to let this money expire in July. But Mnuchin said
that so far there is not evidence of such deterrence.

“T think we’ve seen from the recent numbers that didn’t have a big impact because people
want their jobs, but we will have a significant amount of unemployment, and we’re going
to need to look at doing something there,” he said.

Senators also raised the possibility of targeting future aid to minority-owned businesses
or businesses in areas of particular distress, given the dramatically higher numbers of
unemployment and economic distress being suffered by black workers and business own-
ers in particular.

Strikingly, while the unemployment rate for white workers dropped from 14.2 to 12.4 per-
cent in May, the unemployment rate for black workers actually rose, from 16.7 to 16.8 per-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200611/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Federal aid: Mnuchin, top, loosens rules for small businesses.

cent. Rubio also pointed to recent data showing that in majority-black neighborhoods, 95
percent of small businesses had a cash buffer of less than two weeks. In majority

“Tens of millions of Americans would have been permanently separated from their liveli-
hoods. ... We would have faced the extinction of small business as we know it.” Sen. Marco
Rubio (R-fla.), speaking on the importance of the Paycheck Protection Program

white neighborhoods, only 30 percent of businesses were in such dire straits.

“Clearly, the 30 percent in those neighborhoods need help,” Rubio said. “There’s no one
disputing that. But 95 percent versus 30 percent is a big disparity.”

When the SBA rolled out the PPP on April 3, it immediately ran into a multitude of prob-
lems, and some larger companies with many affiliates received millions in funds, only to
be advised later to return the money. Mnuchin said at the hearing that at least $12 billion
had been returned to the government, where it is again made available to borrowers.
Mnuchin and Carranza both repeatedly came under questioning for the government’s fail-
ure to release more information about recipients of funds. Sen. Ben Cardin (D-MD.) in-
quired about the number of loans issued to affiliates, which allowed some large public
companies to receive many loans.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200611/page/1/textview 3/3
