2020. 6. 17. American Airlines plans to cut its management and support staff by 30% by Sept. 30 and will have other layoffs if it doesn’t get eno...

American Airlines plans to cut its management and support
staff by 30% by Sept. 30 and will have other layoffs if it
doesn’t get enough volunteers for buyouts.

If buyout volunteers fall short, managers, support to face cuts

The Dallas Morning News - 29 May 2020 - 1A - By KYLE ARNOLD Staff Writer kyle.arnold@dallasnews.com

American Airlines plans to cut its management and support staff by 30% by Sept. 30 and
will start laying off workers if it doesn’t get enough volunteers for buyouts.

American Airlines’ workforce
American £9 fines had about 103,630 enployees to start 2020,
but tise company is looking to shitink to match demand battered
fy the OOVIDHS pancdarric

Ama of onnpypes

 

 

 

Fight attendants He 2500
Management and support [EE 7.000

Pilots and fight instroctors 4150

Passenger sorvice HE 14.050

Other | 800

 

SOURCE. American Adlines anni report aM Graphic

Fort Worthbased American says it’s preparing to run a smaller airline, with fewer aircraft
and routes next summer. It and other airlines are now beginning the processes of trim-
ming their workforces in anticipation that there will be fewer passengers for the rest of
2020 and possibly in years to come.

On Thursday, Atlantabased Delta Air Lines sent a memo to employees that said it will need
fewer employees in the fall. Last week Gary Kelly, CEO of Dallasbased Southwest, warned
of “radical restructuring” if business doesn’t improve fast this summer.

American’s announcement means about 5,000 fewer employees, with many jobs being cut
in Fort Worth at the company’s corporate headquarters campus.

“Fleet retirement accelerations are underway, and we will fly roughly 100 fewer aircraft
next summer — mostly widebodies — than we had originally planned,” Elise Eberwein,
American Airlines executive vice president of people and global engagement, said in a let-
ter to employees Wednesday night. “Additionally, running a smaller airline means we will
need a management and support staff team that is roughly 30% leaner.”

Those targeted include employees in

administration, marketing, planning, finance and other functions. The announcement
does not apply to its regional carriers.

Momentum stopper

The cuts could hit hard at American Airlines’ headquarters near DFW International Air-
port, where there are about 12,000 employees in a new $350 million campus constructed to
accommodate a growing workforce.

But the COVID19 pandemic has taken momentum away from any growth in the airline in-
dustry and instead has leaders looking at how they can cut costs as fast as possible in ef-
forts to preserve their companies. American is burning through about $70 million a day as
the number of passengers has dropped by more than 90% since midmarch.

American has already posted

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200529/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. American Airlines plans to cut its management and support staff by 30% by Sept. 30 and will have other layoffs if it doesn’t get eno...

its voluntary buyout package, and if it doesn’t get enough volunteers, the company will
start communicating “involuntary separation” in July with employees remaining on the
payroll through Sept. 30.

American and other airlines agreed not to furlough or lay off workers through the end of
September in exchange for billions in government loans and grants. American received
more than $10 billion and is requesting another $4.75 billion from the Treasury Depart-
ment. The company is also banned from share buybacks, dividends, executive pay raises
and from cutting routes for a period of time in exchange for the financial assistance.

But airlines can’t wait until October to decide future staffing levels.

“Heading into the fall, we have planned to reduce our capacity by about 30%, but hopefully
it won’t be that deep,” Southwest’s Kelly said in a video message. “While overstaffing isn’t
tied to capacity levels, you can make at least some assumptions that we are overstaffed at a
similar rate.”

The COVID19 pandemic has forced painful realities on airlines that enjoyed years of prof-
itability but are labor and costintensive, said Arsenio Martinezsimon, a transportation in-
dustry analyst with Chicagobased consulting firm Kearney.

“Unfortunately, this is going to be the reality for awhile,” Martinezsimon said.

‘This is a goal’

American executives said as recently as Wednesday that the company needs to “rightsize”
the airline, and CEO Doug Parker said earlier this month that American will “go into the
fall with more team members than we have work for.”

Management and support staff are one of the few employee groups that American can cut
without going through unions.

Paul Hartshorn, a spokesman for the union representing American flight attendants, said
about 800 flight attendants have opted for early retirement and about 11,000 flight atten-
dants have signed up for voluntary leave.

“Our goal is to mitigate it through voluntary personal leave,” Hartshorn said.

Even with thousands of workers on leave, American still has too many employees for the
historically low traffic levels it’s experiencing. Hartshorn said some flight attendants are
flying just minimum required flight hours while others are not working at all. Those not
working are still getting paid because of the payroll support through the government grant
programs, but that money will run out Sept. 30.

“As we have previously stated, our preferred outcome is to properly size our frontline team
for the future without having to implement involuntary furloughs. This is a goal, though,
not a commitment, and a stretch goal at that,” Eberwein said in the letter to American Air-
lines workers. “We will be working with our unions in the weeks and months ahead in
hopes of developing programs to facilitate that goal.”

There are nearly 17,000 workers in the management and support staff group, and the
company is “restructuring all levels around key future leaders and functions, beginning
with our officer team,” the letter said.

American is also cutting merit bonuses for management and support staff and requiring all
those employees to take half of their yearly vacation time by Sept. 30. American doesn’t

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200529/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. American Airlines plans to cut its management and support staff by 30% by Sept. 30 and will have other layoffs if it doesn’t get eno...

plan to pay severance to workers who will be laid off, but they will get flight privileges fora
year.

Those that do take voluntary separation will have two options. They can choose to receive
33% of their base pay from Sept. 30 through the end of 2020 or have the option to buy

health insurance at employee rates for 18 months, according to a memo shared with em-
ployees.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200529/page/1/textview 3/3
