2020. 6. 17. Defiant in Hong Kong

Defiant in Hong Kong
With draconian security law imminent, many fear freedoms are at an end

The Washington Post + 5 Jun 2020 + A1 - BY SHIBANI MAHTANI shibani.mahtani@washpost.com Tiffany Liang in Hong
Kong and Nick Aspinwall in Taipei contributed to this report.

Thousands gathered to commemorate China’s massacre of protesters in Tiananmen
Square, ignoring a city ban.

    

Thousands of people, candles in hand, gathered at a park and other locations across Hong
Kong on Thursday to commemorate China’s massacre of pro-democracy protesters in Bei-
jing’s Tiananmen Square 31 years ago, defying the city’s first ban on the vigil, ostensibly
over the coronavirus pandemic.

Shouting pro-democracy slogans, protesters drowned out warnings that gatherings of
more than eight are illegal in the park and ignored nearby police.

“This has been a difficult period for Hong Kong, and I really fear that this will be the last
year we can mark June 4 in any way here,” said Crystal Chan, a 22-year-old student who
also said she was moved to attend for the first time. Chants of “Fight for freedom, stand
with Hong Kong” rang out around her. “The message the students were trying to send in
1989 is the same as ours — that is, the desire of freedom.”

The threat to the annual vigil underscores the deterioration of freedoms in Hong Kong as
the Chinese Communist Party moves to tighten its hold on the financial hub, notably
through a far-reaching law against sedition, subversion and separatism that Beijing plans
to implement within weeks.

Beijing loyalists in Hong Kong’s legislature also pushed through a bill Thursday to crimi-
nalize disrespect of China’s national anthem. At Victoria Park, protesters played “Glory to
Hong Kong,” a song that was born out of last year’s protest movement and is now consid-
ered the territory’s de facto anthem.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200605/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Defiant in Hong Kong

“The existence of the candlelight vigil has always been a symbol to show that ‘one country,
two systems’ still works,” said Lee Cheuk-yan, who chairs the group that organizes the
commemoration, referring to the governance model that previously afforded Hong Kong a
high degree of autonomy. The ban on the vigil, he said, showed it no longer holds.

“Let’s see if the police dare to stop us,” he told the gathering estimated at more than
10,000, markedly smaller than last year’s crowd of about 200,000. “Let’s see if they want
to tell the world that it is game over in Hong Kong even before the national security law”
takes effect.

The Victoria Park vigil was peaceful, and police did not attempt to intervene. Authorities
did make several arrests, however, in the Mong Kok neighborhood.

China’s crackdown in Beijing on June 4, 1989, followed weeks of demonstrations in the
capital and elsewhere as people called for democracy. The Communist Party eventually or-
dered the military to clear the square, launching an operation in which hundreds, perhaps
thousands, of civilians died.

On Monday, despite appeals from organizers, Hong Kong police refused to grant permis-
sion for the vigil, citing social distancing and public health measures to manage the covid-
19 outbreak. Organizers noted, however, that schools have reopened in Hong Kong; sub-
ways, supermarkets, bars and restaurants are again packed; and large religious gatherings
are permitted as the city has largely contained the virus.

Aside from the health rationale, Beijing’s proxies have signaled that they will no longer
tolerate the vigil. Leung Chun-ying, a former Hong Kong chief executive who is now a po-
litical adviser to Beijing, has said the event could be banned under the new security law.
Facing a crackdown, organizers of the vigil called on Hong Kongers to light candles wher-
ever they were to honor Tiananmen victims, and they designated gathering points where
small groups could hold remembrances. Hundreds turned up at several of the alternative
locations across the island, while thousands defied the ban and headed to Victoria Park —
which authorities sealed off with metal fences and other barriers. Others also gathered at
churches for special prayer services.

Last year’s crowd was especially large, as people both commemorated the 30th anniver-
sary of the massacre and asserted their freedoms amid the looming threat from the main-
land.

A few days after last year’s vigil, hundreds of thousands gathered on Hong Kong’s streets
to protest an extradition bill that would have allowed suspects to be sent to the mainland.
That protest launched eight months of massive demonstrations and sometimes violent
unrest. Hong Kong leader Carrie Lam eventually withdrew the bill.

This year, the gathering at Victoria Park also was marked by new slogans, notably: “Hong
Kong independence, the only way out.” Before last year, independence for Hong Kong was
a fringe idea; such slogans were heard on Hong Kong’s streets only after the announce-
ment of the impending national security law.

Although the vigil has been dwindling in popularity among the young — some had lost
faith in the exercise of singing and lighting candles, while others wanted to disengage
from the struggles of the mainland — it has helped to build a culture of political awareness
and protest in Hong Kong.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200605/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Defiant in Hong Kong

“We fight for the same things as they did [in Tiananmen Square] 31 years ago,” said 24-
year-old Hammond Tong. “The Chinese Communist Party has not changed one bit — the
oppression, suppression and persecution have only increased. We must not forget, nor can
we stop fighting.”

The Hong Kong clampdown has upset survivors and others affected by the massacre who
continue to push for China’s leaders to acknowledge the event, as well as others who came
to Hong Kong from the mainland hoping to escape the Communist Party’s rule.

Zhang Xianling, part of the Tiananmen Mothers group, women whose children were killed
in the square in 1989, said in a Youtube video that she felt deeply sorry about the ban on
the Hong Kong vigil but hoped that people would find ways to mourn the victims and con-
demn the Communist Party’s “savage acts.”

Among those heeding the call for remembrance was Cheng YuChing, 57, who fled main-
land China for Hong Kong just before the Tiananmen massacre and intends never to re-
turn. Her father, a landlord, was killed in China’s land reform movement in the 1950s un-
der Mao Zedong, she said.

“Today is a very special day for me, and all Hong Kong people,” Cheng said. She said she
would watch an online vigil at home and light a candle. “Mourning does not have to be
limited by a specific form, or whether we can gather together, but is something that is felt
in our hearts.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200605/page/1/textview 3/3
