2020. 6. 17. Summer is still on

Summer is still on

... but it’s going to look very different, with some standbys struck from the
calendar and others going on with a different presentation.

The Washington Post : 29 May 2020 - A1 : BY FRITZ HAHN

But it’s going to look very different. Here’s where you can savor some of the season’s plea-
sures.

THE WaSHINGTON POST: GOINGOUTGUIDE.COM + PRIDAT, MAY 29, 2020

[onc arn

789 W 3 ti 1 13

1213 14 15 16 17 18 1 10 11 1 13 4 15 19 16 17 18.19 20 21
SM aR wHa Ss S17 18 19 20 27 22 22

6 27 28 29 30 91 13 242 26 2 26 {\

MAY Vi.
FS 5

4

 

 
   

     
   
 

   

F
1 3.465 6
io 14 567 8 9 101712 13
a 1 17 18 1 12:13:41 115 16 17 18 19 20
20 21 22 23-24 25 18 19 2) 22 23 24 25 26 27
27 28 29 30 4 25 2) 29 30

SEPTEMBER
iMTWTES

1243 4 5
\ 7 8 9 10 11 12
2.13 14 «15 134 15 16 17 18 19
1 $NH 26 21 22.23 Mw 6
23 2d 23 26 27 28 2? 28 29.30

R VEMB MBER
T Wwres
23 4 a4 5
9 101 10°11 12
617 1819
232425 26
t 930 31

.. butit's going to look very different, with some standbys struck from the
calendar and others going on with a different presentation. 10

 
  
 

 

While we all wish that this summer would be like last summer or the one before or that
perfect and carefree summer we enjoyed when we were 10 years old, it won’t. It will be dif-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200529/page/1/textview 116
2020. 6. 17. Summer is still on

ferent, though we don’t know how or for how long.

In a city that measures its seasons by annual events, such as cherry blossoms or fireworks,
the uncertainty can be unsettling. The pandemic isn’t new, but as the region begins to
open, the events calendar remains in flux.

Some prominent summer fixtures, such as Jazz in the Garden, were canceled months ago,
while others have been postponed — for months, until 2021, or even the vague and
dreaded “to be announced.”

But that doesn’t mean that our collective diaries will be empty: A number of events not
scheduled to happen before the end of the summer have adopted a wait-and-see outlook,
hopeful that they’!l be able to happen in some form. Restaurants and bars are slowly be-
ginning to reopen their outdoor spaces, though with reduced capacities and new proce-
dures. Pragmatic organizers of festivals, concerts and neighborhood movie nights have
decided it’s just easier to move everything online. And some cherished summer traditions,
such as picking strawberries with the kids, will continue, though in a different format.
WHAT’S STILL ON

The gradual reopening of the D.C. region is a relief for those who’ve been cooped up since
March, but it’s not an excuse to go crazy and throw caution to the wind. Wear masks when
possible and practice social distancing. Try to make backup plans: If you go to a park ora
restaurant and it’s too crowded or you feel uncomfortable, go somewhere else. If you’ve
stuck it out this long, one more day at home won’t kill you.

Amusement Parks: Empty rows on roller coasters. Drivers of gokarts wearing face masks.
Lines for thrill rides spaced six feet apart. The operators of Six Flags America and Kings
Dominion have not announced reopening dates yet, but new guidelines for the Upper
Marlboro amusement park set out regulations that start with contactless temperature
checks at the gates, enforce social distancing on and while waiting for rides and games,
and require masks at all times, except when eating. Six Flags promises to keep attendance
“well below the park’s theoretical capacity” to prevent overcrowding, so guests will have
to make reservations instead of buying walk-up tickets. Still, if you’ve ever dreamed of
having the Joker’s Jinx coaster all to yourself, this might be as close as you’ll get.

Beaches and mountains: The number of cases of cabin fever is at an all-time high, and the
best cure can be found in nature. Much of Shenandoah National Park has reopened to hik-
ers and day-trippers, including Skyline Drive and the scenic overlooks. (The very popular
trails around Old Rag and Whiteoak Canyon remain closed, as do campgrounds, visitors
centers and most indoor facilities.) Maryland’s Sandy Point and Point Lookout state parks,
which offer beach areas on the Chesapeake Bay, have reopened, though there are no life-
guards on duty. Wooded hiking trails and swimming lakes can be found at numerous
parks, including Maryland’s Cunningham Falls and Greenbrier state parks. Just remember:
Many other people are eager to get out, too. Some Maryland state parks are

known to fill up early in the day, especially on weekends; check social media and have a
backup plan in case the trails or sand you’re looking for are packed with people.

Drive-in movie theaters: As movie theaters upgraded with plush seats, immersive sur-
round sound and enormous high-resolution screens, going to one of the area’s dwindling
number of drive-in theaters became about as exciting as going to a sock hop. But with

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200529/page/1/textview 2/6
2020. 6. 17. Summer is still on

many people wary of the idea of cramming into dark rooms with strangers, the idea of
watching movies while cocooned in your own car has become increasingly attractive. The
best option in the D.C. area will be the annual return of Union Market’s Drive-in Theatre,
which features films projected on the Northeast D.C. food emporium. We don’t have all the
details yet — including the crucial start date — but for a date night that mixes nostalgia
and delicious snacks from market vendors, it’s been a summer highlight in recent years.
Outdoor dinner and drinks: After weeks and months of takeout meals, restaurants and beer
gardens in the District and Northern Virginia are getting the go-ahead to reopen this
weekend, with the Maryland suburbs potentially soon to follow. Rules will vary by jurisdic-
tion, but capacity will be a fraction of what it used to be, tables will be a minimum of six
feet from one another, and group sizes will be limited. Rather than just popping down to
your favorite establishment, you need to call or check websites before leaving the house:
Some establishments will require reservations to prevent lines that keep customers from
socially distancing. Others might decide that opening with just a handful of outdoor seats
isn’t worth the cost. One of the most comprehensive plans is coming from the Wharf,
which intends to shut down the waterfront Wharf Street to vehicles to expand both out-
door restaurant seating and create wider pathways for pedestrians; begin operating ca-
bana-style seating for restaurants on the long piers that project into the Washington
Channel; and limiting pedestrian entry and exit points to prevent overcrowding. “If we’re
too successful, that’s a challenge with pedestrian walkways being congested,” says Monty
Hoffmann, the founder and CEO of CN Hoffman, which developed the space with seven re-
tailers and dozens of restaurants. “The great news about the Wharf is that we have a lot of
space.”

Pick-your-own farms: Sure, you can visit farmers markets and get fruits and vegetables
delivered in your CSA. But few things taste of summer like a strawberry that was on the
vine a few hours before — until it was plucked by your own hand. Pick-your-own farms
have long been a back-to-nature day trip for those living close to cities, especially parents
who want to let their kids experience (i.e. run around in) nature. But the chaotic joy of fruit
picking is going to look different this year. Butler’s Orchard in Germantown has embraced
“Social Distancing Strawberry Picking,” requiring guests to make reservations for specific
90-minute time slots Tuesday through Saturday. (Only about 100 people are allowed into
the 12 acres of strawberries during each session.) The rows of plants will be spaced six feet
apart, and groups will work down a row in one direction to maintain proper spacing. Other
options for strawberries include Bluemont’s Great Country Farms, Woodbine’s Larriland
Farms and Waldorf ’s Shlagel Farms. All have different rules about reservations and dis-
tancing; see their Facebook pages for updates. And if you’d rather brighten your house
than fill your stomach, Purcellville’s Fields of Flowers offers pick-your-own blooms on its
farm daily.

WHAT’S GOING VIRTUAL

We’ve all gotten used to — or at least adjusted to — the idea of experiencing concerts, the-
ater and other forms of culture on screens instead of in person. With limits on crowd and
venue sizes for the foreseeable future, some organizations have decided that it’s better to
move online than to cancel events altogether.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200529/page/1/textview 3/6
2020. 6. 17. Summer is still on

AFI Docs: The American Film Institute’s mini-festival for documentary filmmaking has
been attracting younger audiences in recent years. This year’s program, which lets viewers
watch from anywhere, instead of at locations like the National Archives or the AFI Silver
Theatre, might broaden the audience even more. Expect a program of around 80 films on
the schedule, starting with “Boys State,” the winner of the Sundance Grand Jury Prize, on
June 17, followed by a Q&A session with the filmmakers. The full roster films will be an-
nounced on June 10, but expect the usual mix of short subjects and historic documentaries,
as well as evening Q&AS with directors, cast members and film subjects. June 17-21.
Artomatic 2.0: A Virtual Experience: This is not the way Artomatic intended to celebrate
two decades of service to D.C.’S art community, but the freewheeling exhibition, known for
its come-one, come-all approach that displays works by talented local names and up-
and-comers alongside the work of rank amateurs, is making the best of the situation. “It’s
about promoting visual and performing artists,” says executive director Natalie Graves
Tucker. Participants will have their own page on the Artomatic site, grouped by medium,
allowing an in-depth dive into, say, all photographers, with a selection of works for sale.
(Prepare to fall down numerous rabbit holes: Graves Tucker says Artomatic’s “low goal” is
to show works by 500 artists online, but “my stretch goal is 2,000” artists.) Artomatic is
also working to book daily programs of online workshops and events that might cover
“How to promote your art online” or artists’ studio tours, as well as concerts and original
theater. “The question is, ‘ How long do you want to watch?’” Graves Tucker says. “Every
day, there will be something different highlighted.” As always at Artomatic, it sounds like
overload — in a good way. July 20-Aug. 20.

By the People Festival: In three years, the By the People festival grew from a four-day
event with art installations at designated hubs, such as Washington National Cathedral
and the Smithsonian’s Arts and Industries Building, to a 16-day festival with popups, dis-
cussions and performances in Maryland and Virginia as well as all eight wards of the
District. While the expanded festival won’t happen this year, nonprofit arts incubator Hal-
cyon, the founder of By the People, will again team with art consulting/ curating firm
Monochrome Collective for the imaginatively titled “By The People x Monochrome Collec-
tive Art Fair.” The online exhibition promises to “feature dozens of the DMV’S most excit-
ing established and emerging artists,” with works for show and sale. June 12-28.

Pride 2020 Reimagined: The Capital Pride Parade and Festival have technically been post-
poned to a new, yet-to-be-announced date in the fall, but organizers in the Capital Pride
Alliance plan to mark Pride Month with one-off and virtual events, including a roundtable
with LGBTQ leaders discussing community support and recovery from covid-19 (June 1);
the Capital Pridemobile Rainbow Blast, which will find a Pridemobile visiting all corners of
Washington to find Pride-themed houses and storefronts, with DJS and drag kings and
queens along for the ride (June 13); the launch of a new Web series called Pride in the City,
with recorded performances by singers, musicians and drag personalities (June 14); and an
online dance party with DJ Tracy Young marking what would have been the final day of the
festival (June 14). June 1-27.

National Capital Barbecue Battle Virtual Experience: Can the National Capital Barbecue
Battle be the same if you’re not following your nose from one sweet-smelling barbecue

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200529/page/1/textview 4/6
2020. 6. 17. Summer is still on

stand to the next while go-go music thumps from down the block? We’re about to find out.
The BBQ Battle Virtual Experience features grilling and smoking tips from legendary pit-
masters, including Myron Mixon and Moe Cason; wine and beer pairing classes; contests;
and an online battle of the bands. June 1-30.

Smithsonian Folklife Festival: The Folklife Festival, founded in 1967, had planned a pro-
gram on the Mall focused on the cultural traditions of Northeast Brazil and the United Arab
Emirates; the Smithsonian’s worldwide work on conservation; and the Solar Decathlon’s
exhibition of innovations in solar homes. The festival, originally scheduled for late June
and early July, will return next year with largely the same program, minus the Solar De-
cathlon, says festival director Sabrina Lynn Motley, but this summer’s online component
will feature “a lot of the things that people would have found on the Mall.” Motley is par-
tial to the musicians scheduled to perform, including the Emirati jazz group Noon and the
“brilliant singer-songwriter” Flavia Bittencourt from Brazil, and the festival’s online food
programming, such as a piece about cooking with family at Ramadan. “Those kinds of sto-
ries, centered around family, food and traditions, caught people’s imaginations in a differ-
ent way,” she says. Ongoing.

Yards Park ‘Fridays Nights From Home’ Concert Series: Live music in the grassy terrace at
Yards Park has become a tradition on summer nights, but an event that brings thousands
of people to the waterfront space can’t happen yet. Beginning in June, the Friday Nights
From Home Concert Series will feature artists from the series, including Justin Trawick
and the Common Good (June 5) and Pebble to Pearl (June 12), while neighborhood restau-
rants offer takeout specials. Fridays in June at 7 p.m.

WHAT'S POSTPONED

These events plan to take place when guidelines say it is safe to gather in crowds again.
Celebrate Fairfax: The weekendlong carnival and concert, scheduled for the first weekend
of June, has been moved to the fall. Organizers are “currently targeting October” for music
and doughnut-eating contests.

DC Jazz Festival: More than 300 musicians were expected to perform at 40 venues, includ-
ing large outdoor stages at the Wharf, as part of this year’s festival in June. Although the
main event has been postponed until the fall, the festival is livestreaming free Saturday
night concerts on Facebook and YouTube and showcasing performances from previous
festivals online as part of DC Jazzfest From Home.

National Building Museum Summer Block Party with the Folger Theatre: While the Folger
Library is under renovation, its productions are hitting the road. First up was to be “A Mid-
summer Night’s Dream,” staged at an Elizabethan-style “Folger Shakespeare Playhouse”
in the National Building Museum’s Great Hall, as part of the museum’s annual Summer
Block Party series. It will now be the Summer Block Party in 2021, as construction on the
Folger is expected to last until 2022.

WHAT’S CANCELED

It’s just not logistically possible for some of the area’s most popular cultural events to
happen this summer, whether because of crowds, venues or other factors. These are a few
of the casualties; all are expected to return in 2021.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200529/page/1/textview 5/6
2020. 6. 17. Summer is still on

Artscape: The Baltimore arts festival, in what would have been its 39th year, attracts more
than 300,000 attendees to the streets around the Station North neighborhood to see con-
certs, theater and other performing arts in mid-july.

Blerdcon and Otakon: It’s a tough year for those who love dressing up as their favorite
popculture icons. Both Otakon, the mega-convention which drew almost 30,000 attendees
to a celebration of anime, manga and Asian art at the Walter E. Washington Convention
Center in 2019, and Blerdcon, a diverse gathering for thousands of gamers, cosplayers and
fans of nerd culture at the Hyatt Regency Crystal City, are off.

Capital Fringe Festival: In July, at least 469 artists were scheduled to participate in the 15th
edition of the wild-and-woolly Capital Fringe Festival, a sprawling collection of offbeat,
experimental theater and dance performances in intimate spaces in Southwest D.C.
‘Hamilton’ at the Kennedy Center: The touring production of Lin-manuel Miranda’s
awardwinning musical, which was set for a 14-week run at the Kennedy Center beginning
June 16, was effectively canceled when the performing arts center closed through Aug. 9.
The Kennedy Center is “actively working with the producers to secure new dates” for a fu-
ture production, but ticket holders currently have the option of getting a refund or ex-
changing tickets for a gift certificate.

Jazz in the Garden: In early April, the National Gallery of Art canceled all gallery talks,
films and concerts through Labor Day. Chief among these losses was Jazz in the Garden, a
long-running concert series in its Sculpture Garden that the gallery says attracted an aver-
age of 10,000 visitors for concerts on Friday nights throughout the summer.

National Independence Day Parade: The National Park Service says plans for Independence
Day fireworks are going ahead, presumably on a smaller scale, but there won’t be floats or
marching bands or fife-and-drum corps in tricorner hats on Constitution Avenue.
Shakespeare Theatre Company’s Free For All: Even in a town full of free music and culture,
two weeks of free Shakespeare performances at the company’s Chinatown theater draw
large crowds. This year’s offering in late July and early August was to have been a restaging
of the company’s 2018 staging of ““A Comedy of Errors.”

Wolf Trap Summer Concert Series: For the first time in nearly half a century, the National
Park for the Performing Arts has canceled all summer concerts and public programs
through September. Education services, targeted at students and young people, will con-
tinue “through digital and virtual platforms,” according to the Wolf Trap Foundation.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200529/page/1/textview 6/6
