2020. 6. 17. The United States

The United States

The Washington Post - 12 Jun 2020 - A1 - BY MUSTAFA SALIM AND LOUISA LOVELUCK mustafa.salim@washpost.com
louisa.loveluck@washpost.com Loveluck reported from London.

and Iraq began talks over American troop presence in the nation.

U.S. and Iraqi officials began talks Thursday over the future of the relationship between the
two countries, weighing the future of American troops in Iraq as Islamic State militants
pose a renewed threat here.

The U.s.-led military coalition has been under pressure to withdraw forces from Iraq since
January, when President Trump’s decision to kill senior Iranian general Qasem Soleimani
in Baghdad prompted a call from Iraqi lawmakers for an end to the American troop pres-
ence. U.S. troops are stationed in Iraq as part of an effort to defeat the Islamic State group.
The killing of Soleimani by an American drone on Iraqi territory had plunged the U.s.-iraqi
relationship to its lowest ebb in years. But relations have improved since the selection last
month of a new prime minister, Mustafa al-kadhimi. As the country’s former intelligence
chief, Kadhimi has good relations with U.S. officials but emphasizes his desire to wrest
back sovereignty from foreign powers.

“The main principle in these dialogues is to put Iraqi sovereignty first,” he said ina news
conference Thursday. “We don’t want Iraq to become a conflict arena. We want Baghdad to
be a city of peace.”

Travel restrictions caused by the novel coronavirus forced Thursday’s participants to trade
a planned two-day meeting for a two-hour Zoom call instead. Discussions on the substan-
tive issues also are ongoing outside of the highly choreographed, formal discussions, offi-
cials say.

The U.s.-iraq Strategic Dialogue, as the process is called, is likely to last months and will
address issues including how the United States can help Iraq gain access to international
financial support and whether Baghdad can be persuaded to reduce its reliance on Iran for
fuel and electricity.

Seventeen years after the U.s.-led invasion of Iraq, the country is facing crises on multiple
fronts. The collapse of global oil prices has accelerated the risk of economic disaster;
crowds are protesting government failures as Iraq’s coronavirus caseload increases; and
the country remains a key venue for at-times violent competition between the United
States and Iran.

Islamic State militants, meanwhile, have increased their attacks in recent months, and
Iraqi and U.S. military officials say coalition surveillance and air raids remain essential in
the fight against the group.

Though lawmakers from Iraqi factions linked to Iran continue to call for the departure of
the U.S. military, their tone has been less strident in recent months.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200612/page/1/textview 4/1
