2020. 6. 18. Poll shows partisan split on vaccine and masks

Poll shows partisan split on vaccine and masks

The Oklahoman « 9 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Chris Casteel Staff writer ccasteel@oklahoman.com

Less than half of likely Republican voters in Oklahoma would get vaccinated against
COVID- 19, while more than 70% of likely Democratic voters would get the vaccine if it be-
came available, according to a new poll.

And though a majority of voters in both parties surveyed wear am ask at least some of the
time when they go out in public, nearly three times as many Republicans as Democrats said
they rarely or never wear one.

“Tt seems like the decision for voters on whether or not to wear a mask or get a vaccine is
largely driven by partisanship and geography,” said pollster Jackson Lisle, of Amber Inte-
grated.

“In Oklahoma' s urban congressional districts encompassing Oklahoma City and Tulsa,
voters are much more likely to wear am ask in public. Across the state, Democrats are
nearly twice as likely as Republicans to wear a mask in public.

“This partisan breakdown may have to do with the president' s rhetoric regarding

masks. Donald Trump has an 87% approval rating amongst Republican likely voters and
only a 22% approval rating amongst Democrats.”

The poll was conducted June 3-4 by Amber Integrated, of Oklahoma City. The results in-
clude responses from 500 likely voters, with the pool weighted by party registration and
demographics. The margin of error is 4.4% at a 95% confidence level. According to the
survey: » 55% of likely voters would get a vaccine against COVID19 if it became available.
That includes 71% of Democrats, 54% of independents and 45% of Republicans.

-In the largely rural 3 rd congressional district, which includes much of western Oklahoma,
including the area that experienced a major outbreak at a meatpacking plant, only 44% of
all voters said they would get vaccinated.

- In the 5th congressional district, which includes most of Oklahoma County, 66% of all
voters said they would get vaccinated.

- Statewide, 63% of black voters said t hey would get vaccinated, while 57% of whites, 27%
of Hispanics and 88% of Asians said they would get vaccinated.

- Voters ages 60 and older were the most likely to say they would get vaccinated, while
middle-aged respondents were the least likely. Voters with f our- year and graduate de-
grees were more likely than people with some or no college experience to say they would
get vaccinated.

On the question of wearing am ask ,89% of likely Democratic voters said they wear one at
least some of the time, with 48% saying they wear one all the time when in public.

Among Republican voters, 69% said t hey wear one at least some of the time, with 27%
saying they wear one all the time in public. Two-thirds of independents wear a mask at
least some of the time, with 26% saying they wear one all the time.

Nearly twice as many voters in the 5th congressional district said they always wear one
compared to voters in the 3rd congressional district.

Party leaders speak

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/20200609/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 18. Poll shows partisan split on vaccine and masks

David McLain, chairman of the Oklahoma Republican Party, said, “At this point, for me
personally I do not feel it's necessary to get a vaccine for the virus. I'm healthy, I have no
preexisting conditions or immune problems.

“T wear a mask if I'm part i ci pati ng at a business or gathering that requests I wear one to
participate or conduct business. I follow guidelines and/or policies of the gathering or
business I want to participate with.

“It seems that most issues today are political and at the cost of the citizens. The opening
back up of our country is being handled responsibly and is determined by each governor.
“The last thing the De ms (Democrats) want is a viable, strong economic boom in a presi-
dential election cycle by a president who puts all

Americans first, above any political agenda.”

Former Oklahoma Gov. David Walters, a member of the Democratic National Committee,
said, “I would definitely get a vaccine and I do wear a mask any time I'm outside my pri-
vate office or home or outside of family. I don't wear a mask continuously, but I try to wear
a mask in public all the time.”

Walters pointed to Trump, a Republican, for why the approach to the pandemic has been
politicized.

“When the leader of their party decides this is a wedge issue that he can try to make some
hay over and refuses to wear a mask himself and almost denigrates the activity, it's not
surprising to me at all we'd have a 25% to 35% variance between the parties.

“What really concerns me is the big variance on vaccination sin the middle of a pandemic
that's on i ts way to killing 120,000- 150,000 Americans.

It's just dangerous. ... If that sizable a number of the population — half the Republicans
saying they're not going to take it — it's going to be long

and hard to stamp out a pandemic when we've got that big a hole in herd immunity.”
Income loss

Of those surveyed ,30% said they or a member of their household had lost income or a job
because of the pandemic. That is far less than the U.S. Census Bureau reported in May; that
survey showed nearly half of Oklahoma households had lost income since mid-March be-
cause of the pandemic.

In the Amber Integrated poll conducted last week, the highest percentage of households
experiencing lost income were in the congressional districts that include Oklahoma and
Tulsa counties. The urban areas have more jobs in the service sector than more rural areas.
Lisle, the pollster, said, “Likely voters tend to be older than the general population, and
therefore more likely to be retired. Nearly half of our likely voter sample size is above the
age of 60. Almost half of voters ages 18-29 stated that they have lost income.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/20200609/page/1/textview 2/2
