2020. 6. 17. FEMA denies tomado aid

FEMA denies tornado aid

Agency reaffirms declaration that October storm did not meet major disas-
ter severity thresholds

The Dallas Morning News - 12 Jun 2020 - 1A - By OBED MANUEL Staff Writer obed.manuel@dallasnews.com

The Federal Emergency Management Agency again denies disaster relief for damage from
October tornadoes in Dallas.

   

The Federal Emergency Management Agency has again denied Texas’ appeal for federal
disaster relief funding for the tornadoes that tore through Dallas County last October.
FEMA Administrator Pete Gaynor notified state and local officials in a letter addressed to
Gov. Greg Abbott on Wednesday, though it did not specifically lay out why the federal
agency denied the appeal.

“After a thorough review of all the information contained in your initial request and ap-
peal, we reaffirm our original findings that the impact from this event is not of the severity
and magnitude that warrants a major disaster declaration,” Gaynor said in the letter.
Dallas Mayor Eric Johnson said in a statement Wednesday night that the city would con-
tinue seeking relief and thanked Texas Sens. John Cornyn and Ted Cruz, along with other
members of Texas’ congressional delegation, for their efforts in pressuring FEMA for the
disaster relief.

“T am stunned by FEMA’S decision and extremely disappointed that our request for assis-
tance became a bureaucratic game at the federal level — one that leaves Dallas taxpayers
on the hook for tens of millions of dollars in damage while we are still contending with a
pandemic," Johnson said

“The EF3 tornado that struck North Dallas on October 20, 2019, was clearly a major disas
ter. Anyone who saw the wreckage the morning of October 21 could attest to that.”

Rep. Colin Allred, Ddallas, also ripped FEMA’S decision, calling it “outrageous and flat out
wrong.”

po ne

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 2/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. FEMA denies tomado aid

“Amidst a devastating pandemic, the cost will be borne locally by our city, our region and
many North Texans from the damage these tornadoes caused last October,” he said, vow-
ing to “keep fighting for answers” and to “get North Texas the resources we need to re-
cover.”

Cornyn spokeswoman Natalie Yezbick said the senator “plans to discuss this decision with
FEMA and other senior administration officials, and he’!l keep fighting to try to get Dallas
County these relief dollars.”

Cruz spokeswoman Lauren Aronson said that “Cruz is disappointed by FEMA’S decision
and will continue working to help North Texas get the support it needs to recover from the
devastation caused by the tornadoes last October.”

The storms caused nearly $190 million in damage, according to state estimates.

The federal agency first denied the state’s request to get reimbursed 75% of its costs re-
lated to recovery efforts in April.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/2020061 2/page/1/textview 2/2
