2020. 6. 17. Biden raps move against protesters

Biden raps move against protesters
In speech to nation, former VP vows to heal racial wounds

The Dallas Morning News - 3 Jun 2020 - 1A - By ANNIE LINSKEY, MATT VISER and SEAN SULLIVAN

Joe Biden criticizes White House decision to clear protesters for president’s photo op.

 

Seeking to console a nation riven by nights of violence with a promise to heal its racial
wounds, former vice president Joe Biden on Tuesday bluntly criticized the White House’s
decision a night earlier to forcibly clear protesters from a Washington street so President
Donald Trump could pose with a Bible in front of St. John’s Episcopal Church.

“When peaceful protesters dispersed in order for a president — a president — from the
doorstep of the people’s house, the White House, using tear gas and flash grenades, in or-
der to stage a photo op at one of the most historic churches in the country, or at least
Washington, D.C., we can be forgiven for believing that the president is more interested in
power than in principle,” the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee said.

Biden added that Trump appears “more interested in serving the passions of his base than
the needs of the people in his care.”

Biden’s criticisms of the president used his harshest words to date, as he laid into him for
both rhetoric and actions that have deepened divisions in the nation, in Biden’s view in-
tentionally.

“Look, I look at the presidency as a very big job. And nobody will get it right every time.
And I won’t either,” he said. “But I promise you this. I won’t traffic in fear and division. I
won’t fan the flames of hate. I’ll seek to heal the racial wounds that have long plagued this
country — not use them for political gain.”

Biden’s remarks, which also touched on police behavior and historical inequities against
minority communities, came after days of peaceful protests, marked with violence, which
have scarred Philadelphia, where he delivered the speech, as well as cities across the na-
tion.

During the roughly 20minute address, Biden quoted or echoed civil rights leaders from
earlier generations, including Rosa Parks and the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200603/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Biden raps move against protesters

But he also named some of today’s leaders, including Rev. William Barber, and called on
Congress to act now to reform policing laws — including a bill introduced by Rep. Hakeem
Jeffries, DN.Y., to outlaw choke holds.

Trump’s campaign responded swiftly to the speech, suggesting without any evidence that
Biden is supportive of the destruction of property that has accompanied protests. “He has
obviously made the crass political calculation that unrest in America is a benefit to his ca...
didacy,” said Katrina Pierson, a Trump campaign senior adviser.

Biden launched his speech by speaking to the nation’s concerns over police brutality, pay-
ing homage to George Floyd and repeating his final utterances — “I can’t breathe.” Floyd,
an unarmed black man, died after a police officer knelt on his neck in Minneapolis.
“George Floyd’s last words. But they didn’t die with him. They’re still being heard. Echoing
across this nation,” Biden said. “They speak to a nation where too often just the color of
your skin puts your life at risk. They speak to a nation where more than 100,000 people
have lost their lives to a virus and 40 million have filed for unemployment — but the dis-
proportionate number of those deaths and job losses is concentrated in the black and
brown communities.”

He noted that Eric Garner, who died six years ago in police custody in New York under sim-
ilar circumstances, had uttered the same words.

“It’s time to listen to those words,” Biden said. “To try to understand them to respond —
to respond with action. Our country is crying out for leadership. Leadership that can unite
us leadership that brings us together.”

Up until Tuesday, Biden had largely avoided calling for specific new reforms to deal with
the repetitive use of force by police departments, most notably against nonwhite commu-
nities. His criminal justice reform plan, released last summer, lacks many of the proposals
that were part of the 2016 Democratic Party platform, including training officers to avoid
the use of force, required use of body cameras and federal investigations of all policein-
volved shootings.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200603/page/1/textview 2/2
