2020. 6. 17. A Houston man

A Houston man
Petition says governor’s mandates violated the state Constitution

The Dallas Morning News - 30 May 2020 - 1A - By ALLIE MORRIS Austin Bureau allie.morris@dallasnews.com Twitter:
@Morrisreports

is challenging the legality of Gov. Abbott’s executive orders.

AUSTIN — A conservative Houston businessman and longtime critic of Texas’ ruling
Republicans is challenging Gov. Greg Abbott’s power to issue executive orders during the
coronavirus pandemic.

An emergency petition to the state Supreme Court filed Friday contends Abbott’s orders
violate the Texas Constitution by suspending laws enacted by the state Legislature.
“Shockingly, after almost three months, Abbott has not convened the Legislature to ad-
dress legislation related to ‘extraordinary occasions’ surrounding the COVID19 pan-
demic,” says the petition, which bears the names of conservative activist Steven Hotze,
two Republican lawmakers and a handful of business owners and church leaders. “Instead,
Abbott continues to issue executive orders that suspend laws and infringe on the constitu-
tional liberties of Texans and further destroy the Texas economy.”

Abbott’s office did not immediately respond to a request for comment.

The petition comes as the Republican has begun easing statewide restrictions he put in
place to slow the spread of the coronavirus. Restaurants, bars and other businesses have
been allowed to start reopening, though at a limited capacity. Some of Abbott’s other exec-
utive orders, such as one requiring hospitals to reserve a certain portion of their beds for
treating COVID19 patients, remain in place.

Hotze, who has also sued Harris County officials over stayathome orders, could not be
reached for comment.

Fredericksburg Rep. Kyle Biedermann, one of the two legislators whose names are on the
petition, said he never gave his permission and is having his name removed. The other,
Rep. Bill Zedler, an Arlington Republican, did not immediately respond to a request for
comment.

Abbott’s orders closing gyms, restaurants, bars and other businesses through April led to
some protests, especially after the jailing of Shelley Luther, who refused to shut her Dallas
salon.

One of the petition’s signers, Gabrielle Ellison, was arrested after reopening her Odessa bar
in early May. “I don’t believe we need to be allowed to open our businesses,” Ellison told
The Dallas Morning News on May 12. Abbott let bars partially reopen on May 22.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200530/page/1/textview 4/1
