2020. 6. 17. DALLAS COUNTY

DALLAS COUNTY
Dallas Mavericks give PPE for protesters, Jenkins announces

The Dallas Morning News - 4 Jun 2020 - 1A - By CHARLES SCUDDER ARIA JONES and NATALY KEOMOUNGKHOUN
Staff Writers

reports 239 more coronavirus cases.

Dallas County reported 239 new coronavirus cases and four deaths Wednesday, a dip from
Tuesday’s record numbers.

Three of those who died lived in Dallas: a man in his 50s, a woman in her 50s and a woman
in her 100s. A Lancaster man in his 40s also died.

The county has recorded 249 deaths, including 20 in the last two days. The county’s coro-
navirus case total is 10,958.

Dallas County Judge Clay Jenkins on Wednesday encouraged peaceful protesters to wear
face masks and maintain social distancing while demonstrating. In a statement, Jenkins
said the Dallas Mavericks have secured masks and hand sanitizer for protesters and asked
that people use those masks or bring their own.

“We are committed to protecting the rights and safety of peaceful protesters,” Jenkins said
in the statement. “This virus disproportionately affects communities of color.”

Test sites cut hours

The city of Dallas also announced that two major community testing sites for COVID19
have scaled back their hours of operation to comply with the city’s curfew in response to
the ongoing protests in and around downtown.

Testing at American Air

lines Center will be from 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. Monday through Saturday, according to a city
news release. The site at Ellis Davis Field House in the Red Bird area will be open from 8
a.m. to 5 p.m. Monday through Saturday. Both locations will be closed Sunday.

Hours at the AAC will return to 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. when the curfew is lifted, the news release
said.

For more information, visit dallascityhall.com/covid19.

Tarrant County

Tarrant County reported 138 new coronavirus cases and one death on Wednesday. The
death was of a Fort Worth woman in her 80s who had underlying health conditions.

The county has now recorded 5,761 coronavirus cases and 168 deaths.

Collin County

Collin County reported the death of an 89yearold Frisco man Wednesday, bringing the
countywide death toll to 36. He died Tuesday night at a hospital in Plano, health officials
said.

The Texas Department of State Health Services is reporting new cases, monitoring and
tracing in Collin County. DSHS reported 34 new cases in the county, bringing the total to
1,346.

Denton County

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200604/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. DALLAS COUNTY

Denton County health officials announced 19 new coronavirus cases Wednesday, bringing
its total to 1,435. Total deaths remained at 32. Meanwhile, officials also reported 14 new
coronavirus recoveries.

Ellis County

Ellis County officials announced Wednesday that it had tested all nursing home residents
and staff, and found 68 cases of coronavirus. They also announced that 10 of the county’s
15 COVID19 deaths came from nursing homes.

Eight of those deaths and 56 cases — including 41 residents and 15 employees — came
from Legend Oaks Healthcare and

Rehabilitation in Waxahachie, according to a county release.

One death each was reported at Ennis Care Center and Pleasant Manor. One staff member
and three residents tested positive at Ennis Care, and one staff member and one resident
tested positive at Pleasant Manor. At Legend Oaks in Ennis, two staff members and one
resident tested positive.

One staff member tested positive at each of three facilities: Focus Care, Trinity Nursing
and Rehabilitation, and Bluebonnet Rehab.

The Ellis County Local Health Authority also announced Wednesday seven additional cases
of the coronavirus, bringing the county’s case total to 359. It also reported four new recov-
eries, bringing the total to 308.

Rockwall County

Rockwall County had not reported new numbers as of publication deadline Wednesday.

As of Monday, the county had reported 186 confirmed cases, with 154 recoveries. Thirteen
people have died — all of them residents of the Broadmoor Medical Lodge in Rockwall.
Johnson County

Johnson County health officials reported two new coronavirus cases Wednesday, bringing
its total to 204. No new deaths were reported, leaving the county’s death toll at four.

The county also reported that three more people had been released from isolation, for a to-
tal of 156.

Kaufman County

Kaufman County had not reported new numbers as of publication deadline Wednesday. Its
most recent totals are 230 coronavirus cases, one death and 214 recoveries.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200604/page/1/textview 2/2
