2020. 6. 17. ‘On their own’:

‘On their own’:

The Washington Post - 12 Jun 2020 - A1 - BY RACHEL WEINER AND ROSALIND S. HELDERMAN rachel.weiner@wash-
post.com rosalind.helderman @washpost.com Amy Goldstein and William Wan contributed to this report.

States wrestle with how to expand testing.

 

In Maryland, drive-through coronavirus testing sites are now open to all residents,
whether or not they show signs of illness.

In Oregon, by contrast, officials have said that generally only people with symptoms of
covid-19, the illness associated with the coronavirus, should be tested — even in the case
of front-line health-care workers.

In Rhode Island, officials have proactively tested all of the state’s 7,500 nursing home res-
idents, including those with no symptoms, and are developing plans to test more people in
high-risk workplaces, such as restaurants and grocery stores.

The wide range of approaches across the country comes as the federal government has of-
fered little guidance on the best way to test a broad swath of the population, leaving state
public health officials to wrestle on their own with difficult questions about how to mea-
sure the spread of the virus and make decisions about reopening their economies.

Faced with conflicting advice from experts in the field, states are using different tests that
vary in reliability and have adopted a variety of policies about who else should get tested
and when — particularly when it comes to asymptomatic people who are considered low-
risk for the illness.

“The states are on their own,” said Kelly Wroblewski, director of infectious diseases at the
Association of Public Health Laboratories, noting that the kind of guidance the federal
government routinely gives in screening for flu and other outbreaks “has been absent” in
the covid-19 pandemic. “There has been no coordination.”

That means that while tests are available to anyone who wants them in states such as Ken-
tucky and Georgia and some large cities such as Detroit and Los Angeles, state officials in
Idaho and Louisiana continue to recommend that only sick people get tested.

The lack of a unified national strategy has left Americans uncertain about whether and
how to be tested and is hampering reopening plans, experts warn.

Many officials now worry that protests in more than 100 U.S. cities in recent days after the
death of George Floyd in police custody, which have drawn thousands of people packed
closely together, could spark new infections.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200612/page/1/textview 115
2020. 6. 17. ‘On their own’:

So far, about 460,000 Americans are being tested a day — 0.15 percent of the population,
and still shy of the 900,000 to 30 million that experts say need to be tested daily to capture
the extent of the virus’s spread.

“The case numbers we’re seeing are probably massively undercounted,” said Divya Sid-
darth, a researcher who helped devise a testing strategy for Harvard University’s Safra
Center that emphasizes finding and suppressing the disease in areas with fewer cases.
“These [lower prevalence] regions are likely to reopen, and they’ve barely done any tests.”
The lack of clear information is forcing businesses large and small, schools, universities
and professional sports organizations to make their own decisions about how much test-
ing they need to be safe.

Some institutions have announced their own plans for universal testing. The National
Hockey League, for example, has said it plans to test all players daily as part of a plan to
resume play in June. The University of Arizona has developed its own antibody test that’s
available to all students and local health-care workers.

Under a law passed earlier this year, the Trump administration is required to develop a na-
tional testing strategy. But an 81-page document submitted to Congress by the Depart-
ment of Health and

Human Services last month was not released publicly and offered few detailed recommen-
dations.

The Washington Post obtained a copy of the plan, which set a goal for states of testing at
least 2 percent of their residents in May and June. But how to meet that benchmark and
whether to go further was left up to state leaders who were required to submit plans this
month to HHS for review.

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has recommended universal testing for
residents of nursing homes, which have been especially hit hard by the coronavirus. But
the HHS document said the CDC was still working on guidelines for other large populations
of mostly asymptomatic people.

Mia Palmieri Heck, a spokeswoman for HHS, said the federal government “has provided
prescriptive criteria about testing asymptomatic individuals when they affect highly vul-
nerable populations such as individuals who live in nursing homes, working in or visiting
health-care clinics or communal dining spaces.”

The question of asymptomatic testing is particularly tricky given that the CDC late last
month said that its researchers now believe as many as 35 percent of people infected with
the coronavirus never show symptoms of disease.

Typifying the kind of conflicting information facing states, a World Health Organization
official sparked global confusion on Monday when she said it is “very rare” for people with
no symptoms to transmit the disease. After significant pushback from researchers, the of-
ficial said Tuesday that scientists continue to believe that people without symptoms do in
fact spread the virus — but more research is needed to understand by how much.

She noted that some modeling shows as much as 41 percent of transmission may be due to
asymptomatic people.

“In some ways, this may be the Achilles’ heel of the entire testing challenge for this virus,”
said Ashish Jha, director of the Harvard Global Health Institute, who has advocated for in-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200612/page/1/textview 2/5
2020. 6. 17. ‘On their own’:

creasing the number of people getting tested.

Local and state health officials worry that the lack of coherent strategy could result in tests
becoming widely available for the affluent, while remaining limited for those with fewer
resources, including minority communities that have already been disproportionately af-
fected by the virus.

At the University of Arizona, officials plan to reserve molecular swab tests, which deter-
mine if a person is currently infected, for symptomatic students and their contacts. Each
test is about $50 to $75; there are 60,000 students, staff and faculty and each would have
to be tested repeatedly.

“Maybe the NEL can afford that; we can’t, and I don’t know any university that can,” said
Robert C. Robbins, the university’s president.

‘Box the virus in’

When coronavirus cases began to mount in March, a severe shortage of test kits and sup-
plies meant tests were sharply rationed. Even after it was clear that the virus was spread-
ing in the United States, the CDC at first recommend only testing people who had visited
China or been in contact with someone who had.

Later, federal officials suggested that younger, healthy people did not necessarily need
testing even if they were experiencing coronavirus symptoms, reasoning that the tests
should be reserved for hospitalized patients for whom a positive result might make a dif-
ference in treatment.

As tests have become more available, officials have begun to recommend that anyone who
is experiencing signs of illness, even a mild cough or sore throat, get one.

The goal is to identify and quarantine people with the disease, and then use contact tracers
to track down people who have interacted with that person and quarantine them as well.
“Testing is just part of acomprehensive strategy,” former CDC director Tom Frieden said.
“As you emerge from that sheltering situation, you box the virus in.”

But when it comes to testing people without symptoms, state recommendations vary.
About at least half of states aim to test people identified as contacts of known positive
cases, according to a Post tally, as was recommended in new guidance from the CDC this
week. But many others tell those people to self-isolate for 14 days.

“Every state is figuring this out on its own, little bit by little bit,” said Philip Chan, medical
director for the Rhode Island Department of Health.

Nearly all states have set aside thousands of tests for people in congregate settings — resi-
dential settings where large numbers of people live in proximity, especially nursing homes
and prisons.

But only a handful of states have so far satisfied the CDC goal to test everyone living ina
nursing home, where the age and underlying medical conditions of residents make them
especially vulnerable to covid-19 outbreaks.

Some states have also prioritized testing front-line healthcare workers and other people
working elbow-to-elbow in manufacturing facilities, particularly meatpacking plants,
which have been hit hard by the virus.

Even states that have conducted widespread testing in such facilities face difficult ques-
tions about whether a single round of testing is sufficient, given that people could easily

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200612/page/1/textview 3/5
2020. 6. 17. ‘On their own’:

contract the virus at any time, including after testing negative.

A tricky disease

A number of states and large cities, such as Detroit and Los Angeles, have opened driv-
ethrough testing sites like those offered in Maryland, a mode of mass testing used effec-
tively overseas in South Korea and elsewhere.

Experts have warned that drive-through sites often fail to collect enough information
from those tested to follow up effectively. They also prioritize people who choose to show
up, tending to mean tests go to better educated and informed residents and not necessarily
those most likely to have been exposed to the virus.

In Georgia, public officials are advertising on radio and social media to encourage anyone
to get tested at drive-through sites.

Those tested have included political leaders, who got tested largely to encourage others to
do so too, only to find themselves “shocked” when their results came back positive, said
Phillip Coule, chief medical officer of the Augusta University Health System, which is part-
nering with the state on testing.

“It’s a great demonstration of how tricky this disease is,” he said.

Other states have downplayed asymptomatic testing as unreliable or a poor use of re-
sources.

Oregon only opened testing to front-line workers and long-term care residents without
symptoms in April and continues not to recommend asymptomatic testing, saying on the
state website that it is “not useful” because the false negative rate is high. Viral tests have
been estimated to have up to a 20 percent false negative rate.

At a recent news conference, Oregon Health Authority Chief Medical Officer Dana Hargu-
nani said people without symptoms are “unlikely or certainly less likely to cause transmis-
sion of the virus.”

For states looking to figure out who to test and when, advice from national experts has
been abundant — but not always consistent.

Proposals from academics and other experts vary widely in their recommendations of the
numbers of tests that should be performed each day, and many do not offer guidance about
who should be tested.

Some researchers have recommended focusing on parts of the country that have few cases
in hopes of stamping out the disease.

‘“‘We should quickly get resources to places where the disease can be suppressed, then
backfill tests in the places currently overwhelmed,” said Glen Weyl, an economist at Mi-
crosoft, who worked on the Harvard University proposal. “It’s like a war — you have to
more troops than the enemy in order to win a battle.”

Other researchers have proposed blanketing the country with tests, with a focus on places
experiencing clear outbreaks.

Paul Romer, an economist at New York University, said there should be mass testing in hot
spots that is quickly expanded to near-universal, constant testing for everyone — 23 mil-
lion tests a day, noting that the cost of tests have dropped.

“It would be feasible if we just invested and made it happen,” he said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200612/page/1/textview 4/5
2020. 6. 17. ‘On their own’:

Still, many experts agree that completely random asymptomatic testing is not an effective
strategy.

A report issued late last month by the Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy at
the University of Minnesota called for ramping up testing nationwide, including in some
congregate settings and as part of public health research. But the report found that wide-
spread testing of people without symptoms was not advisable in most workplaces, in
schools or in the broader community.

“There’s been far too much of this group think around, ‘ test, test, test,’ without under-
standing what it’s accomplishing,” said Michael Osterholm, the director of the center.
“You need the right test, at the right time, for the right reasons.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200612/page/1/textview 5/5
