2020. 6. 17. MALARIA DRUG

MALARIA DRUG

The Dallas Morning News - 4 Jun 2020 - 1A - By MARILYNN MARCHIONE

fails to prevent COVID19 in large new study.

A malaria drug President Donald Trump took to try to prevent COVID19 proved ineffective
for that in the first large, highquality study to test it in people in close contact with others
with the disease.

Results published Wednesday by the New England Journal of Medicine show that hydroxy-
chloroquine was no better than placebo pills at preventing illness from the coronavirus.
The drug did not seem to cause serious harm, though — about 40% on it had side effects,
mostly mild stomach problems.

“We were disappointed. We would have liked for this to work,” said the study leader, Dr.
David Boulware, an infectious disease specialist at the University of Minnesota.
Hydroxychloroquine and a similar drug, chloroquine, have been subjects of much debate
since Trump started promoting them in March. Hydroxychloroquine has long been used
for malaria, lupus and rheumatoid arthritis, but no large studies have shown it or chloro-
quine to be safe or effective for much sicker patients with coronavirus, and some studies
have suggested the drugs may do harm.

Federal regulators have warned against hydroxychloroquine’s use except in hospitals and
formal studies because of the risk of side effects, especially heart rhythm problems.
Boulware’s study involved 821 people in the United States and Canada living with someone
diagnosed with COVID19 or at high risk of getting it because of their job.

They were randomly assigned to get either the nutrient folate as a placebo or hydroxy-
chloroquine for five days, starting within four days of their exposure.

After 14 days in the study, 12% on the drug developed COVID19 symptoms vs. 14% in the
placebo group, but the difference is so small it could have occurred by chance, Boulware
said.

There are some big caveats: The study enrolled people through the Internet and social me-
dia, relying on them to report their own symptoms rather than having them tracked ina
formal way by doctors. Participants were not all tested for the coronavirus but were diag-
nosed as COVID19 cases based on symptoms in many cases. And not all took their
medicines as directed.

The results “are more provocative than definitive,” and the drug may yet have prevention
benefits if tried sooner or in a different way, Dr. Myron Cohen of the University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill wrote in a commentary in the journal.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200604/page/1/textview 4/1
