2020. 6. 17. Dangerous chain reaction: Businesses unable to pay rent.

Dangerous chain reaction: Businesses unable to pay rent.

Landlords face bankruptcy if rent doesn't come in, but retailers say they'll
go out of business if they must pay right now

The Washington Post - 4 Jun 2020 - A1 - BY HEATHER LONG heather.long@washpost.com

Nearly half of commercial retail rents were not paid in May. Companies as big as Starbucks
say the financial devastation from the shutdown has left them unable to pay their full
property bills on time. Some companies warn they will not be able to pay rent for months.

  

The problem for the broader U.S. economy is that when businesses like Ross Stores and T. J.
Maxx stop paying rent, it sets off an alarming chain reaction. Landlords are now at risk of
bankruptcy, too. Commercial real estate prices are falling. Jobs at property management
companies and landscapers may be lost. Banks and private investors are unwilling to lend
to most commercial real estate projects anymore, and cash-strapped city and local gov-
ernments are realizing the property taxes they usually rely on from business properties are
unlikely to be paid this summer and fall.

The situation is especially dire for owners of hotels and malls. Such retailers as Bed Bath &
Beyond, Famous Footwear, H&M, and the Gap, movie theaters AMC and Regal and gyms
like 24 Hour Fitness stopped paying rent entirely in May, according to Datex Property So-
lutions. Starbucks paid May rent but also sent a letter to landlords requesting landlords to
make concessions starting June 1 and continuing for 12 months.

Overall, Datex found that 58.6 percent of retail rents were paid in May. Office and ware-
house tenants are still paying rent for now, but there remain concerns about whether ten-
ants will renew leases as working from home gains in popularity.

“Social distancing means financial Armageddon for commercial real estate and munici-
palities in coming months,” warned R. Christopher Whalen, head of Whalen Global Advi-
sors, on his blog for investors. He predicted defaults could be worse than the peak losses of
the early 1990s commercial real estate bust “by a wide margin.”

The crisis is particularly threatening for tens of thousands of small businesses, some of
which operate on such small margins that they say they won’t survive the pandemic reces-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200604/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. Dangerous chain reaction: Businesses unable to pay rent.

sion if they have to pay rent right now. Many small companies are asking landlords fora
break, but commercial properties often have a complex chain of owners. Getting them all
to agree quickly is proving difficult.

Will Eastman has a lot of nightmares lately that he’s going to be the owner who closes
down the iconic U Street Music Hall forever. Eastman said he has tried everything to save
the independent music venue and club in Washington, D.C., but it’s hard to generate rev-
enue when U Street Music Hall has been shut since March 13 and doesn’t expect to host live
shows until the fall, at the earliest.

“Right now my biggest challenge is with rent. We have had a back-and-forth with our
landlord that is kind of mind-boggling,” said Eastman, who hasn’t paid April, May or June
rent. “We have no shows scheduled for summer.”

Eastman is in talks with his landlord, but finding a solution has been difficult. Real estate
experts say at least U Street Music Hall knew who to pick up the phone and call because his
landlord and the property’s mortgage holder are nearby in the D.C. area. For many other
businesses, the ownership of their property is far more complex.

“It’s not just the landlord and the tenant that have to talk. Many properties are owned bya
number of investors,” said David Ling, a real estate professor at University of Florida. “A
lot of this is going to have to be sorted out via lawsuits and the courts.”

Fewer than 40 percent of commercial property loans are owned by banks, according to the
Mortgage Brokers Association. The rest are in the hands of various life insurers, real estate
investment trusts (REITS) and investors in commercial mortgage-backed securities,
which are known as CMBSS.

Dozens and sometimes hundreds of commercial mortgages are packaged together into
CMBSS, which are typically purchased by a bunch of investors. This complex structure is
supposed to spread out the risks and rewards, but it adds multiple layers of ownership to
properties.

The commercial real estate market ballooned in the past decade to $20 trillion, as in-
vestors hunted for high, yet seemingly safe, returns.

“This really is a tale of who is your lender?” said Andrew Little, a partner at real estate in-
vestment bank John B. Levy & Co. in Virginia. “If you have a bank lender or an insurance
company lender, you can probably get through this and hopefully get to a point where
things start bouncing back. If your lender is a Wall Street CMBS lender, you are in trouble.”
Typically, when businesses stop paying their rents and the building is ultimately owned by
the investors in CMBS securities, the tenants have to call a management company known
as the special servicer. Already, $32 billion in CMBS loans have gone to special servicers,
according to Moody’s, and almost all have been hotel and retail properties. These servicing
firms have little incentive to give tenants a break, Little says, because they make money by
tacking on extra fees and penalties.

What this all means is that hotel and retail properties are under severe strain to pay the
rent and could collapse in a wave of defaults and foreclosures, warn real estate experts. Al-
ready, big investment firms are preparing to scoop up cheap properties. Blackstone and
Oaktree have raised massive funds to plunge into the distressed commercial market, much
as they did with residential homes after the Great Recession.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200604/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. Dangerous chain reaction: Businesses unable to pay rent.

Lawmakers are trying to figure out how to prevent businesses — as well as their landlords
— from going out of business, but government leaders are struggling to determine which
approach would work best.

Some landlords are asking local governments to delay property tax collections, but many
municipalities are already financially strained as tax proceeds plunge and costs skyrocket
during the pandemic.

Small-business advocates are pushing Congress to change the rules on Paycheck Protec-
tion Program loan forgiveness qualifications, so more than 25 percent of the money can be
used for rent and other overhead costs. A House bill that passed last week would allow up
to 40 percent of the money to go toward rent, but the Senate has not agreed to the changes
yet.

Washington passed emergency legislation in May requiring commercial retail landlords to
agree to rent payment plans. California is debating an even more aggressive proposal to
force landlords with tenants that have been severely affected by coronavirus closures to
renegotiate leases. Landlords say this upends the very basis of contract law.

“It’s not appropriate policy to have blanket rent forgiveness. It could really create some
chaos,” said John Worth, executive vice president for research at the National Association
of Real Estate Investment Trusts.

Lawmakers behind these initiatives say the goal here is to avoid a massive loss of small
businesses.

“Businesses and individuals are hurting because of this crisis, and it is no one’s fault.
We’re trying to make sure people can survive,” said D.C. Council member Mary M. Cheh
(D-ward 3), who sponsored the emergency legislation. “In the end, the rents will be paid.”
Perhaps the most effective intervention so far has come from the Federal Reserve, which
has purchased about $9 billion of CMBSS and told banks they won’t be penalized for mak-
ing reasonable concessions on loans. The Fed’s actions have helped unfreeze the commer-
cial real estate market for investors, although it has done little to help small businesses
unable to pay rent.

For U Street Music Hall in Washington, paying the rent looms large. An online donation
campaign to help U Street workers has raised over $20,000, and Eastman managed to get
$120,000 from the federal government’s Paycheck Protection Program for small busi-
nesses. But to have this loan forgiven, he has to use $90,000 of the funds to pay his work-
ers.

The remaining funds can be used to pay rent and other expenses, but there’s barely enough
leftover to cover the $21,000 rent each month. He recently asked his landlord for a pay-
ment plan.

U Street Music Hall’s landlord is Hanny Chan, owner of JRC Standard Properties, a small
commercial real estate company in Washington. Despite the pandemic, Chan still has to
pay the mortgage, taxes, insurance, utility bills and trash collection costs for the property
where U Street Music Hall is located. His bills have not stopped, either.

Chan spoke with his lender, Industrial Bank, about relief on the mortgage, but Chan found
the terms were too onerous, according to his lawyer.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200604/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. Dangerous chain reaction: Businesses unable to pay rent.

JRC, as the landlord of music hall, “has not received any mortgage relief from its lender.
After the public health emergency was declared and U Street Music Hall was shuttered, it
withheld rent for April and May without any request for any rent relief,” said Ian Thomas,
a lawyer at Offit Kurman who represents JRC.

Industrial Bank prides itself on serving the D.C. community, said chief executive B. Doyle
Mitchell Jr. He said the bank has provided “probably 30 percent” of its commercial real es-
tate clients with some sort of workout plan.

Chan and Eastman are headed to court to work it out.

For now, U Street Music Hall’s full rent is still due.

“Businesses and individuals are hurting because of this crisis, and it is no one’s fault.
We’re trying to make sure people can survive.” D.C. Council member Mary M. Cheh (D-
ward 3)

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200604/page/1/textview 414
