2020. 6. 17. Top state Republicans

Top state Republicans
Bexar County chairwoman shared George Floyd conspiracy theory

The Dallas Morning News - 5 Jun 2020 - 1A: By ROBERT T. GARRETT Austin Bureau rigarrett@dallasnews.com Twitter:
@Roberttgarrett

called on a Bexar County party chairwoman to step down after sharing a conspiracy theory.
AUSTIN — Top Texas Republican leaders on Thursday called on Bexar County GOP Chair-
woman Cynthia Brehm to resign for spreading a George Floyd conspiracy theory.

Gov. Greg Abbott and U.S. Sen. John Cornyn said it’s time for Brehm, who late last month
suggested that the coronavirus was a Democratic hoax, to go.

Brehm told Spectrum San Antonio, the cable TV provider in Bexar County, that she posted
the message at the urging of a black conservative activist who’s a friend. She said she has
no intention of resigning.

On her Facebook page Wednesday, Brehm advanced a discredited conspiracy theory that
Floyd’s death while handcuffed by Minneapolis police last week, with his neck held under
the knee of one officer for more than eight minutes, was staged to damage President Don-
ald Trump’s standing with black voters.

“These comments are disgusting and have no place in the Republican Party or in public
discourse,” John Wittman, Abbott’s communications director, told the Austin AmericanS-
tatesman on Thursday. “Cynthia Brehm should immediately resign her position as chair of
the Bexar County Republican Party.”

Shortly thereafter, Cornyn’s campaign said in a written statement, “Senator Cornyn
shares Governor Abbott’s belief that Cynthia Brehm should resign.”

According to the Americanstatesman, U.S. Rep. Chip Roy, Raustin, and Travis County
Republican Chairman Matt Mackowiak also said Brehm should resign.

“She has been an embarrassment for two years,” Mackowiak tweeted.

Late Thursday, former Speaker Joe Straus, Rsan Antonio, tweeted that Brehm is “unfit” for
partisan or other office “due to her long history of making racist and inflammatory state-
ments, peddling conspiracy theories and bringing embarrassment upon Bexar County
Republicans.”

On her Facebook page — in a post that subsequently was removed but not until after Gil-
bert Garcia, a columnist with the San Antonio Expressnews, captured it in a screenshot —
Brehm speculated that Floyd’s death was staged because Trump has been gaining some
traction among black voters.

Though all four Minneapolis officers involved in the incident have now been charged with
crimes, Brehm mused that one officer might be missing.

The whole affair “has the smell of MK Ultra activation.”

MK Ultra is a reference to CIA mindcontrol experiments that were conducted between 1953
and 1973.

Later Thursday, Abbott also called on the Nueces County GOP chairman, Jim Kaelin, to re-
sign after he shared the Facebook post about Floyd’s death being staged, the Corpus Christi
Callertimes reported. Kaelin, who is a former longtime sheriff of the county, shared the

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200605/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Top state Republicans

post on his Facebook page on May 29. Kaelin didn’t immediately return requests for com-

ment to the Callertimes.

The unsubstantiated theory that Floyd’s death was staged was the subject of a PolitiFact,
published Friday, that said a similar social media post had been “flagged as part of Face-
book’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed,” and that it had
been “shared thousands of times and copypasted by other users.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200605/page/1/textview 2/2
