2020. 6. 17. Canada: Video shows officers punching indigenous chief.

Canada: Video shows officers punching indigenous chief.
Trudeau says police footage is ‘shocking,’ calls for investigation

The Washington Post + 13 Jun 2020 - A1 . BY AMANDA COLETTA foreign@washpost.com

Newly released video footage from the dash cam of a Royal Canadian Mounted Police vehi-
cle shows officers tackling a high-profile indigenous chief in Alberta and punching him in
the face while arresting him over an expired vehicle registration on his truck.

   

Athabasca Chipewyan First Nation Chief Allan Adam accused the RCMP last week of as-
saulting him and his wife after the couple left a casino in Fort Mcmurray on March 10. In
photos Adam says were taken after the incident, his face is bruised and bloodied. He said
the police’s use of force was excessive.

In a12-minute video, the chief and the RCMP are shown arguing. Adam tells an officer he
is “tired of being harassed” by the RCMP and swears at him.

At one point, an officer grabs Adam’s wife, prompting Adam to protest. At another, Adam
becomes agitated and throws his jacket down. His wife appears to try to calm him.

Later, an officer tries to grab Adam’s arm in an apparent attempt to arrest him. Within
seconds, another officer tackles him to the ground and punches him in the face while re-
straining him.

An officer orders “Don’t resist!” and applies a chokehold.

Adam yells as his wife and niece prevail upon the officers to stop. When police take him
away in handcuffs, his face is bloody.

Wood Buffalo RCMP said in a statement last week that Adam was charged with resisting
arrest and assaulting a police officer. Supervisors reviewed video of the incident, they said,
and concluded that the actions of its officers were “reasonable” and did not merit an ex-
ternal investigation.

Alberta’s police watchdog later announced that it would review the incident.

The video was made public on Thursday following a court application to stay Adam’s
charges.

Its release comes the same week that RCMP Commissioner Brenda Lucki has faced criti-
cism for saying in media interviews that while there might be “unconscious bias” among
some officers, there is no systemic racism in the national police force.

Prime Minister Justin Trudeau disagreed, telling reporters Thursday that systemic racism
is an issue in many institutions, including the RCMP. He has been under pressure to offer
concrete proposals for addressing the issue.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200613/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Canada: Video shows officers punching indigenous chief.

On Friday, Trudeau described the video as “shocking” and called for an independent in-
vestigation.

Lucki reversed her position Friday afternoon, saying in a statement that she should have
“definitively” said systemic racism exists in the RCMP.

Thousands of Canadians have participated in protests against racism and police brutality
following the death of George Floyd and several incidents in Canada involving interactions
between police and black and indigenous people.

In Toronto, Regis Korchinski- Paquet, a 29-year-old Afro-indigenous woman, died last
month after falling from the balcony of her apartment while police were inside. Her family
has asked whether officers played a role in her death. Ontario’s police watchdog is investi-
gating.

In Nunavut, an RCMP officer was captured on video knocking down a 22-year-old Inuk
man with the open door of his police truck.

Canadians are also demanding answers about the death of Chantel Moore, an indigenous
woman who was shot and killed in New Brunswick last week by an officer called to her
house for a “wellness check.” Police said that Moore, 26, had a knife and that the officer
acted in self-defense.

Activists and some local officials in cities across Canada have called for defunding the po-
lice, implementing body cameras and collecting better data about the use of force and the
race of those affected.

More than one-third of people fatally shot by RCMP officers in the decade to 2017 were
indigenous, according to a document obtained by the Globe and Mail under a public
records request. Indigenous people make up roughly 5 percent of Canada’s population.

In a statement Thursday, the Athabasca Chipewyan First Nation called on the RCMP to
suspend the officers involved in the Alberta incident.

“All of this resulted from an expired license plate tag,” it said. “The video speaks for it-
self.”

Adam told reporters his interaction with the RCMP was not unique.

“Every time our people do wrong, the RCMP, they always seem to use excessive force, and
that has to stop,” he said. “Enough is enough.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200613/page/1/textview 2/2
