2020. 6. 17. Twitter put a factcheck label on President Trump's tweets for the first time.

Twitter put a factcheck label on President Trump’s tweets for
the first time.

Site adds warning for the first time, a shift from its usual hands-off ap-
proach

The Washington Post - 27 May 2020 - A1 - BY ELIZABETH DWOSKIN elizabeth.dwoskin@washpost.com Cat Zakrzewski
contributed to this report. More at washingtonpost.com/ technology

Twitter on Tuesday slapped a fact-check label on President Trump’s tweets for the first
time, a response to long-standing criticism that the company is too hands-off when it
comes to policing misinformation and falsehoods from world leaders.

The move, which escalates tensions between Washington and Silicon Valley in an election
year, was made in response to two Trump tweets over the past 24 hours. The tweets falsely
claimed that mail-in ballots are fraudulent.

Twitter’s label says, “Get the facts about mail-in ballots” and redirects users to news arti-
cles about Trump’s unsubstantiated claim.

The tweets, said Twitter spokeswoman Katie Rosborough, “contain potentially misleading
information about voting processes and have been labeled to provide additional context
around mail-in ballots.”

The label directs users to articles by CNN, The Washington Post and the Hill, along with
selections from the articles and a page summarizing the findings of fact-checkers.
Twitter’s action quickly drew backlash from Trump and his supporters.

Twitter “is now interfering in the 2020 Presidential Election,” he tweeted. “They are say-
ing my statement on Mail-in Ballots, which will lead to massive corruption and fraud, is
incorrect, based on fact-checking by Fake News CNN and the Amazon Washington Post.”
For its 14-year existence, Twitter has allowed misinformation by world leaders and every-
day citizens to spread virtually unchecked. Its leaders have long said users would engage in
debate on the platform and correct false information on their own.

But Trump has made many false claims on social media, particularly on his preferred
medium of Twitter, and has also attacked people in ways that critics have argued could vi-
olate company policies on harassment and bullying.

For example, Twitter’s actions come on a day when the platform was facing a barrage of
criticism over another set of Trump tweets. Earlier on Tuesday, the widower of a former
staffer to then-rep.

Joe Scarborough asked Twitter chief executive Jack Dorsey to delete tweets by Trump fur-
thering a baseless conspiracy theory about the staffer’s wife’s death. Those tweets are still
up, a reflection of social media companies’ approach to policing content that can appear
inconsistent even as they have stepped up their enforcement.

Twitter is debating whether to take action on the Scarborough tweets, said a person famil-
iar with the discussions who spoke on the condition of anonymity because he was not au-
thorized to speak publicly.

Its much larger rival, Facebook, by contrast, launched a fact-checking program several
years ago. Facebook funds an army of third-party fact-checkers to investigate content,

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200527/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Twitter put a factcheck label on President Trump's tweets for the first time.

which then gets labeled on the site and demoted in its reach.

Twitter, which has roughly 330 million users compared with Facebook’s 2.6 billion, has
not had the resources or the institutional will to engage fact-checkers.

But Twitter has changed its approach during the pandemic. In March, the company revised
its terms of service to say it would remove posts by anyone, even world leaders, if such
posts went “against guidance from authoritative sources of global and public health infor-
mation.”

Earlier this month, Twitter rolled out a policy saying it would label or provide warning
messages about coronavirus-related misinformation, even when that information is not a
direct contradiction of health authorities and does not violate the company’s policies. It
said at the time that it may expand the labels to areas such as other types of health-related
hoaxes or other situations in which there is a risk of harm. Tuesday’s tweets on elections
represent an expansion into a new area of misinformation.

Trump posted the same content about mail-in ballots on Facebook. The company did not
respond to a question about whether it would label or remove it.

As a matter of policy, Twitter and other tech companies hold world leaders to different
standards than everyday users. The content of world leaders is kept up by Facebook, Twit-
ter and YouTube, even when it violates company policies, a practice known as the “news-
worthiness exemption.”

That policy has long been subject to criticism because comments by world leaders can have
massive impacts on people’s behavior and have even greater potential to cause harm.
Trump’s recent promotion of the antimalarial drug hydroxychloroquine as an experimen-
tal treatment for the novel coronavirus, for example, caused prescriptions and sales to
soar.

If Trump had instructed people to take the drug outright, the statement would probably
have been taken down by Facebook and Twitter, according to people who work there who
spoke on the condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to speculate.
Instead the president walked a fine line, promoting the benefits of the drug and saying he
was taking it himself.

The World Health Organization has halted studies of the drug out of concern that it causes
more harm than good.

In March, Twitter labeled a manipulated video of presumptive Democratic presidential
nominee Joe Biden that was retweeted by Trump. That same month, Facebook took down a
misleading ad about the U.S. census, one of two times that Facebook has taken action
against the Trump campaign.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-washington-post/20200527/page/1/textview 2/2
