2020. 6. 18. STORES TO CLOSE

STORES TO CLOSE

The Oklahoman - 6 Jun 2020 - Ai - By Nathan Bomey USA Today

J.C. Penney is closing six stores in Oklahoma, including the one in Midwest City

 

J. C. Penney on Thursday revealed its initial list of proposed stores to be closed perma-
nently as the company tries to stabilize its finances under Chapter 11 bankruptcy protec-
tion, including six in Oklahoma.

The department store chain, the largest company to file for bankruptcy protection so far
during the coronavirus pandemic, had already said it would close 242 locations for good,
leaving about 600 open.

But it had not yet revealed which locations were poised for liquidation.

In a bankruptcy court filing Thursday, the company listed the first 154 locations to close.
Bankruptcy Judge David Jones is expected to hold a hearing on June 11 to consider the pro-
posal.

Assuming he signs off, going-out-of-business sales could begin immediately.

They are expected to last 10 to 16 weeks.

“While closing stores is always a next re mel yd iffi cult decision, our store optimization
strategy is vital to ensuring we emerge from both Chapter 11 and the C OVID -19 pandemic
as a stronger retailer with greater fin an ci alf le xi bili ty to allow us to continue serving our
loyal customers for decades to come ,” J. C. Penney CEO Jill Soltau said in a statement.

The closures include nine in California, nine in Ohio, eight in Indiana, eight in Florida,
seven in Georgia, seven in New York, seven in Texas, six in Kentucky, six in Oklahoma, six
in South Carolina, six in Tennessee.

The announcement comes as J. C. Penney is gradually reopening stores that have been
temporarily closed due to the coronavirus pandemic.

The company said nearly 500 had re opened as of Thursday.

J.C. Penney stores closing in Oklahoma

Tulsa: S Yale Avenue

McAlester: E Carl Albert Parkway

Enid: W Owen K. Garriott Road

Shawnee: N Kickapoo

Avenue

Muskogee: N Main Street

Midwest City: SE 29 Street

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-oklahoman/20200606/page/1/textview 4/1
