2020. 6. 17. Border workers set to return to job amid fears of the virus.

Border workers set to return to job amid fears of the virus.

Infections, deaths rise in El Pasojuarez area as plants set to reopen

The Dallas Morning News - 25 May 2020 - 1A - By ALFREDO CORCHADO Bordermexico Correspondent and VALERIA
OLIVARES Special Contributor

CIUDAD JUAREZ, Mexico — This nation is far from flattening the COVID19 curve, but
thousands of maquiladora employees are set to return to work after the government caved
to intense pressure from the Trump administration to ramp up production and restart the
supply chain deemed critical for North America’s economy.

ae i

        
   
 

 

 

 

The target date for reopening is June 1, although some officials say work may begin as
early as Monday. The massive, multibilliondollar international supply chain — which con-
nects cities across Mexico and the U.S., including Dallas — stretches across El Paso and
Juarez, one of the border regions hardest hit by COVID19.

The symbiotic cities, wary of each other over the rising number of coronavirus cases, have
not met federal or state guidelines from their own governments for making progress
against the virus before reopening. Officials on both sides of the border are warning that
moving too fast could raise the risk of more outbreaks and further devastate the mostly
U.S.owned maquilas, the factories that are the backbone of the supply chain and the local
economy.

Mexico, which began reopening in three phases last

week, has reported at least 66,000 confirmed COVID19 cases and more than 7,100 con-
firmed deaths. Juarez’s coronavirus death toll dramatically rose daily last week. It stood at
210 Sunday.

Powerful politicians are putting their bets on a smooth reopening.

“T trust in the conscience and responsibility of our managers in the maquiladora industry
of exportation,” said Chihuahua state Gov. Javier Corral, who also called for rapid testing
of employees. “First, because I know them; second, because I don’t believe that they mean
to gamble and risk an infection. ... As factories reopen, there will be cases of contagion,
without a doubt. But we don’t want an outbreak.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200525/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. Border workers set to return to job amid fears of the virus.

But many health experts are rattled by the thought of a hasty return to normal. One inter-
national health expert, Dr. Alejandro Diaz, warned that reopening the maquilas at the
height of a pandemic will lead to “chaos” and “catastrophic consequences.”

Many health experts believe the real number of cases and deaths is much higher in the
border city of about 1.4 million people because of severely limited testing in the region. A
report last week by the anticorruption think tank Mexicanos Contra la Corrupci6n y la Im-
punidad — Mexicans Against Corruption and Impunity — claims the undercount in Mex-
ico may be at least three times higher than has been reported in official statistics, chal-
lenging the government’s official narrative.

Juarez alone is testing 0.5% or less of the population, said Diaz, who added that Mexico’s
death toll, including in Juarez, is “likely much, much higher” than what has been reported.
Across the Rio Grande, the sixthlargest city in Texas saw its most new cases yet on Thurs-
day, along with five deaths. On Friday, the city added one more, so that 59 lives have been
lost to COVID19. There are 2,160 confirmed cases.

Those numbers have led to a oneweek delay in the second phase of El Paso’s reopening af-
ter a lockdown. Illnesses are threatening hospital capacity. The city is testing an estimated
2.5% of its population.

Diaz questioned why, if the border region and industry workforce are so important and
“essential,” not enough “protection protocol” — such as contact tracing — is in place to
provide an “immune bubble to secure the safety of workers,” many of whom commute
across the border daily.

No choice but reopen

Top city economic officials in Juarez, while expressing reservations about reopening, say
they have little choice but to move forward, insisting that Juarez is too big and too impor-
tant to fail. They point to devastating economic losses, including more than 50,000
maquila jobs at stake, that could lead to social unrest. They also see an opportunity to
strategically position the Juarezel Paso region as an alternative investment zone amid an
intensifying U.S.China feud that could bring jobs back to North America.

“T think we have a huge market that’s integrated between the borders of Chihuahua, Ari-
zona, New Mexico and Texas,” said Alvaro Bustillos, CEO of Vaquero Trading and president
of the Juarez Economic Development office, adding Juarez’s resilience has long been tested
by organized crime. “We see huge investments from Asia coming down our way, so we
have to take advantage of the opportunity.”

Bustillos also pushed back against claims from workers that many were infected inside
maquilas, saying there is no proof of that. He added that employees need to be reminded
“maquilas made a lot of dreams come true,” moving people up the economic ladder.
About a dozen maquila employees were interviewed by The Dallas Morning News. Those
interviews revealed that many are are deeply anxious about returning to work, feeling de-
spair over a looming economic disaster and resentful toward their employers because
swifter action was not taken to save workers or acknowledge the deaths of their colleagues
in a public way. The workers interviewed declined to speak on the record, for fear of retri-
bution.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200525/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. Border workers set to return to job amid fears of the virus.

Most of the employees interviewed work for Michiganbased Lear Corp., whose global oper-
ations includes a plant in Arlington. Lear, which prides itself as an industry innovative
leader in reopening during a pandemic, has 10 plants in Juarez and employs 24,000 work-
ers. More than 350,000 Juarez workers are employed in maquilas.

Monica Rosales, 26, is the daughter of Lear Rio Bravo maquila supervisor Raul Rosales, one
of several employees who died from COVID19. An El Pasoan, she remains in communica-
tion with colleagues of her father in Juarez.

“There’s a lot of fear, but also a lot of need,” she said. “I just hope companies are more
careful with the lives and health of their workers. They’re human beings.”

Some factories deemed essential never shut down in Juarez. This past week, others began
to admit workers for training around social distancing measures, face masks and other
guidelines. Workers must even know how to walk in and exit plants separately.

“This virus ... is here to stay, it’s not disappearing,” said Leticia Ruiz, subdirector of pre-
ventive medicine and health promotion in Chihuahua. “We'll have to change.”

Industry ‘in diapers’

Outside Lear Rio Bravo this past week, the old familiar rumbling of buses arriving or leav-
ing could be heard.

“Right now, the entire maquiladora industry is in diapers,” said a Lear supervisor who
spoke on the condition of anonymity because he is not authorized to speak for the com-
pany. “Nobody is actually ready to start again.”

He said Lear has paid management salaries in full while assembly workers are making
60% of their salaries. In some cases, that’s less than $20 per week.

“Some of the people say, ‘We do need to work, we need our income, our pockets are hurt-
ing,’ ” he said about Lear employees. “Contrastingly, there’s fear of the infections out
there, fear of contagion ... of the lack of medical attention.”

Lear did not comment on the salary changes.

The supervisor has been under strict quarantine along with his family. He worries about
workers crisscrossing the border daily, fearing they might be coming back into Mexico in-
fected. He and others interviewed said the many colleagues who have died weigh heavily
on them.

“T’ve honestly lost the count,” he said. “Easily, just in Lear, there have been some 30, 40
people who have died.”

Lear has previously acknowledged several workers died of probable COVID19 symptoms.
Late Thursday, a company spokesman said in a statement that “any facility reopening date
will be at the determination of government regulations. ... Our No. 1 priority is the health
and safety of our employees.”

Chihuahua state health officials did not directly answer questions about the actual death
toll in the maquila sector.

When asked whether there was any pressure from the U.S. to reopen the economy, Dr. Ar-
turo Valenzuela, of the Chihuahua State Health Authority for the northern zone of Mexico,
firmly said, “No.”

U.S. pressure includes a letter signed by 300 American corporate chief executives in April
imploring Mexican President Andrés Manuel Lépez Obrador to reopen, and a tweet by U.S.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200525/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. Border workers set to return to job amid fears of the virus.

Ambassador to Mexico Christopher Landau, who usually uses Twitter to tout Mexico’s
tourist, cultural and foodie haunts.

“There are risks everywhere, but we don’t all stay at home for fear we are going to get ina
car accident,” Landau wrote. “The destruction of the economy is also a health threat.”
This past week, both governments also announced the U.S.Mexico border will remain
closed to “nonessential” travel through June, adding to the bleak economic outlook for
both cities.

And as the economic toll from the virus rises, the border’s old catandmouse smuggling
game has adapted to new times. U.S. Customs and Border Protection announced Thursday
that it is seeing a rise in the number of counterfeit or nonFdacompliant COVID19 tests,
hand sanitizer, face masks and mask filters crisscrossing the border.

“Some appear to be exploiting the pandemic for financial gain, leaving the consumer at
risk,” said CBP El Paso Director of Field Operations Hector Mancha.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/the-dallas-morning-news/20200525/page/1/textview 4/4
