2020. 6. 21. Video seen of death in custody of OKC police

Video seen of death in custody of OKC police

Derrick Scott pleaded “I can't breathe' during his arrest last year

Tulsa World - 10 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Randy Ellis

OKLAHOMA CITY — Black Oklahoma City resident Derrick Elliott Olie Scott pleaded “TI
can't breathe! Please! Help me! I can't breathe,” as three Oklahoma City police officers
pinned him to the ground with their knees and hands, removed a handgun from his pocket
and held him there for about 13 minutes while waiting for

= — =

 

paramedics to arrive.

Scott's pleas were chillingly similar to those of George Floyd, whose death at the hands of
Minneapolis police has been the catalyst for nationwide protests.

Scott, 41, was pronounced dead at an Oklahoma City hospital on May 20, 2019, about an
hour after his arrest.

Release of police officers' body cam video of the arrest was one of the demands of Black
Lives Matter. The Oklahoma City Police Department complied with that demand Monday
by releasing the video to family and the news media.

Derrick Scott's mother, Vickey Scott, reviewed portions of the arrest videos and was upset
by what she saw.

“T think that it was one of the most inhumane things that I have ever seen,” she said.
“They did not do anything for him. They treated him like he was an animal.

“He was trying to get his breath. He was trying to breathe, and they ignored him the whole
time, like he was nothing. They even treat animals better than they treated my son.

“It's very hard,” she said. “I want every mother to watch that ... and imagine that's your
son's last so many minutes of life and he's dying and they're saying that he's faking.”

She was referring to portions of the videos where one of the officers questioned whether
her son was faking being unconscious as he lay handcuffed on the ground with another of-
ficer still kneeling on his legs.

She said she has had to watch the videos a little bit at a time because it's too hard to watch
them all at once.

“My heart is just broken. It's broken,” she said. “I want the officers to be convicted of
killing my son. I want something to be done about police officers being more compassion-
ate when people tell them they can't breathe.”

Oklahoma County

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/202006 10/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 21. Video seen of death in custody of OKC police

District

Attorney David Prater reviewed the arrest last year and had a very different conclusion
about what he saw. Prater sent an email to Police Chief Wade Gourley last August clearing
the officers of wrongdoing.

“In reviewing the actions of your officers I saw nothing inappropriate; nor was there any
evidence of misconduct by your officers,” Prater wrote. “They did exactly what they
should have done under the circumstances and handled the call very well.”

Oklahoma City Police Capt. Larry Withrow called a news conference Tuesday and described
the arrest.

Withrow said the techniques used to restrain Derrick Scott were consistent with what offi-
cers are taught at the police academy to minimize the risk of physically harming suspects.
He specifically mentioned that one officer placed her knee across Scott's shoulder blades
and that another officer straddled Scott's waist and later slid down to his legs, once control
had been achieved.

He said that when Scott complained that he couldn't breathe and appeared to lose con-
sciousness, officers rolled him over into a “recovery position” and immediately called for
medical assistance and began to monitor his health.

“T don't know that there is any more that they could have done to monitor the suspect or
ensure his health,” Withrow said.

The incident began when police officers responded to a disturbance call in the 1000 block
of Southeast 44th Street.

The caller said a man was creating a disturbance and “brandishing a firearm,” Withrow
said.

Withrow said Derrick Scott “took off running,” was chased down and taken to the ground
by officers.

A loaded handgun was taken by an officer from Scott's front pocket, Withrow noted.

The Oklahoma Medical Examiner's Office listed the manner of Scott's death as “undeter-
mined” but said he died as a result of a right pneumothorax (collapsed lung).

Physical restraint, recent methamphetamine use, asthma, bullous emphysema and
atherosclerotic heart disease were listed as contributing factors.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/202006 10/page/1/textview 2/2
