2020. 6. 21. Tulsa Transit sets hero bonuses

Tulsa Transit sets hero bonuses

Tulsa World - 28 May 2020 - A1 - By Kevin Canfield

Tulsa Transit will use some of the nearly $20 million in federal COVID-19 emergency relief
funding it received to pay $500 hero bonuses to each of its frontline employees.

a

tainty ey
HEALING /

     

The bonuses will go to up to 219 employees who deal directly with the public or maintain
equipment. That amounts to about $110,000, or $1.14 per hour for a typical employee
working a 40-hour week.

The Metropolitan Tulsa Transit Authority unanimously approved the bonuses Wednesday.
“As an essential employee, they have to be out there,” Ted Rieck, general manager of Tulsa
Transit, said after the meeting. “So the risk of being exposed to the virus is higher proba-
bly than the normal person would be experiencing. So I think it's important that we show
appreciation for what they are doing. It's a big deal to be out there.”

Rieck said Tulsa Transit has taken other measures to help keep employees' morale high,
including buying them lunch and providing gift cards.

“There are other transit systems in the country, like Detroit, where drivers are not happy
and they express that in the media and sometimes maybe threaten to walk out or not go to
work or call in sick,” Rieck said. “And we haven't had that here. We've had people pretty
much business as usual.

“First of all, we think it's because we've got good employees who are committed, but the
second thing is we are working hard to keep people's spirits up, and the hero

History in the making as House casts proxy votes

WASHINGTON (AP) — It's a day for the history books on Capitol Hill: For the first time,
House lawmakers were voting by proxy, an unprecedented move to avoid the risk of travel
to Washington during the pandemic.

To mark Wednesday's history-making moment, House Republicans sued to stop the ma-
jority party from going ahead with the new system.

The House, with 432 current members and three vacancies, is trying to strike a balance be-
tween working from home during the coronavirus outbreak and honoring the Constitu-
tion's requirement to be “present” and voting.

The House rules change is fast becoming a political test on party lines. Dozens of
Democrats signed up to have colleagues cast their vote by proxy. Twenty Republicans
joined in the leaders' lawsuit against that move. bonus is just one of those things we do.”
COVID-19 has cut deeply into Tulsa Transit ridership. Through the first 10 months of the
fiscal year ending June 30, fixed route ridership was at 2.4 million, or 26% less than pro-
jected.

Rieck said Tulsa Transit can use the federal emergency funding for the same purposes it
uses its annual federal funding and for other purposes specific to the pandemic.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/20200528/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 21. Tulsa Transit sets hero bonuses

A four-year spending plan presented to the MTTA board Wednesday shows a large per-
centage of the CARES Act funding going to offset an expected decrease in city funding for
the transit system. Funding is also designated for fare assistance, cleaning supplies and
hero bonuses or other morale-building expenditures.

“This is unbudgeted, but it's in our thinking, if the virus really gets bad, worse than it has
so far and we have to shut the system down for a month, nobody is riding the bus or any-
thing, we would use some of the money to pay that expense,” Rieck said. “Try to keep em-
ployees paid and their benefits going.”

Tulsa Transit's operating budget for the current fiscal year is approximately $21.5 million.
The bus system's primary funding sources are the city ($9.3 million), the federal govern-
ment, including CARES funds ($6.1 million), fares ($2 million) and the state ($1.1 million).
The $2.2 trillion CARES Act was approved by Congress in late March. The measure includes
funding for a wide range of COVID-19 relief efforts, including individual payments to
American households, funding for the Public Broadcasting System and loans for large
businesses.

Rieck said Tulsa Transit sent a letter to members of the Oklahoma congressional delega-
tion urging them to support the relief package but not making a formal request for fund-
ing.

“Tt was an industrywide effort to get this,” he said. “It wasn't, ‘Oh, yeah, Tulsa is asking,
let's give it to Tulsa.' We don't have that kind of clout.”

Rieck said he is not sure how the federal government determined how much CARES Act
funding Tulsa Transit would receive.

“Normally they distribute money based on an area's population and how much service you
operate but I don't know how that factored into us getting $20 million,” he said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/20200528/page/1/textview 2/2
