2020. 6. 21. State major source of cockfighting roosters

State major source of cockfighting roosters

Animal rights group claims Oklahoma top breeder of roosters used for
cockfighting rings in Guam

Tulsa World - 27 May 2020 - A1 - By Curtis Killman

Oklahoma continues to be a major source of roosters bred for fighting purposes despite
state and federal laws that prohibit the practice, national animal rights
Aik,

     

Tuesday.

Public shipping records examined by the rights groups show Oklahoma to be the top ex-
porter to Guam of chickens bred for fighting, which is illegal in the United States and its
groups claimed territories.

The groups called on local district attorneys and the U.S. Attorney for the Eastern District
of Oklahoma to enforce state and federal anticockfighting statutes.

“As the evidence provided herein shows, the Eastern District is fraught with individuals
who have been involved in global trafficking and fighting of birds,” said Drew Edmondson,
former Oklahoma attorney general and current co-chairman of the National Law Enforce-
ment Council of Oklahoma, an arm of Animal Wellness Action

manager of Greenwood Rising History Center; Mayor G.T. Bynum; U.S. Sen. James Lank-
ford; Police Chief Wendell Franklin; and Brenda Alford, a Race Massacre descendant.

The commemoration will be live-streamed from the Mabel B. Little Heritage House on the
Centennial Commission's Facebook page, @Tulsa2021, and on its website, tulsa2021.0rg.
The Mabel House is on the grounds of the Greenwood Cultural Center. It is where Eddie
Faye Gates recorded interviews with survivors of the massacre and their families.

“They are going to have anywhere from 2 to 21/2 minutes to comment on the importance of
what we are recognizing and what it means to them personally and to the city and the
state,” Armstrong said. “It will be pretty much a launch pad that, hey, from this day for-
ward we are counting down to the last year leading up to the commemoration of the cen-
tennial.”

The Race Massacre Commission is also holding a candlelight vigil Sunday night to remem-
ber the victims. The event, which is closed to the public, will begin at 10:30 p.m.

The conflict began on the evening of May 31, 1921, when gunshots were fired at the Tulsa
County Courthouse. It ended with the destruction of Greenwood the following morning.
Massacre descendants, community partners and local stakeholders will stand at memorial
plaques along Greenwood Avenue for a moment of silence while holding a candle or other
lighting device.

The city, working with PSO, will turn the lights off at the intersection of Greenwood Av-

enue and Archer Street. At the same time, a video presentation will be played on the
https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/20200527/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 21. State major source of cockfighting roosters

scoreboard of ONEOK Field.

The Rev. Robert Turner of Vernon A.M.E Church, 311 N. Greenwood Ave., said the special 10
a.m. service will pay tribute to those who helped rebuild the church after the sanctuary was
destroyed in the massacre.

“We have a ledger from 1935 that has names put in it and the amount of money they paid
to help pay off the mortgage of the sanctuary we built on top of the basement after the
massacre destroyed our original sanctuary,” Turner said.

Also Sunday, the Terence Crutcher Foundation, ACLU of Oklahoma and other organiza-
tions are sponsoring a Youtube Live discussion on reparations at 6 p.m.

The event, called, “Their Blood Cries Out,” can be found on Facebook, Youtube Live and
ACLU.ORG.

City Councilor Vanessa Hall-harper will be one of the speakers.

“'Their Blood Cries Out' is being held because it is time to have a serious conversation
about local reparations concerning the 1921 Race Massacre that destroyed the black com-
munity,” she said. “This forum will ultimately lead to action steps to hold the city and
state accountable.” The Race Massacre was sparked by a report that a black man may have
attempted to assault a white woman. The official death count, based on death certificates
and National Guard reports, is 37, but authorities said at the time that they couldn't con-
firm that all deaths were accounted for.

Some estimate that hundreds of people were killed. Hundreds more were injured, and
thousands were left homeless.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/20200527/page/1/textview 2/2
