2020. 6. 21. New lease OK'D

New lease OK'D

Tulsa World - 29 May 2020 - A1 - By Rhett Morgan

Ending a months-long impasse, the city of Tulsa and Navistar/ IC Bus of Oklahoma on
Thursday announced a new 20-year agreement that will keep the bus manufacturer and

  

eS a = eb
“This agreement establishes a winwin partnership between the City of Tulsa and IC Bus for
decades to come,” Tulsa Mayor G.T. Bynum said in a statement. “The industry leader in
school bus manufacturing will have a home to build products that are trusted all around
the world, while local jobs are secured and the taxpayers' facility is properly maintained
for the long term. I am excited for the future of IC Bus in Tulsa.”
Navistar says the nearly mile-long, 1-million-square-foot plant is the world's leading
producer of school buses, making about 75 buses daily. The business also provides annual
direct income of more than $60 million and spends $750 million each year on vendors and
suppliers, including more than 100 Oklahoma- based businesses.
The new lease prioritizes current and long-term investments in plant maintenance and
upgrades and creates an automatic process for establishing a multiyear investment pro-
gram every five years of the lease.
“We'd like to thank Mayor Bynum for his personal involvement in resolving these negoti-
ations,” Phil Christman, president of operations for Navistar International Corp., parent
company of IC Bus, said in a statement. “Thanks to his leadership, we have a decades-long
framework to stay, invest and grow the IC Bus plant and our supply chain
in Tulsa and the state of Oklahoma. Tulsa is a great community with a talented workforce.
We're very pleased to be remaining in Tulsa, and look forward to keeping it what it is today
— the school bus capital of the world.”
The municipality and bus manufacturer had been at odds for months.
In January, the city found IC Bus in default of its lease at the city- owned Air Force Plant No.
3. It notified Navistar of its intent to terminate the contract on Feb. 14, but a date to reach
an agreement was extended to May 29.
Initiated 20 years ago, the previous lease allowed Navistar to rent the facility for $1 per
term of the lease so long as it assumes comprehensive maintenance responsibilities at the
facility.
A 250-page site assessment by engineering firm Cyntergy, which examined items such as
the roofing, heating, electrical and structural systems, found the need for “millions of dol-
lars” in deferred maintenance that violated the lease's terms, Bynum said earlier this
month.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/20200529/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 21. New lease OK'D

Also in May, Bynum said Navistar, through a Chicago-based public relations firm, was
“grossly misinforming employees” about negotiations, which he said at the time were
continuing in good faith. He added that while Navistar had met goals on employment — it
was to employ 1,200 workers by the end of 2005, according to that lease — it had fallen
short on maintenance.

Bynum said weeks ago that he wanted to renegotiate a 10-year, roughly $28 million lease
that has specific maintenance benchmarks going forward. Navistar had claimed the city
wanted it to spend about $20 million on upgrades and repairs by 2024.

The annual base rent for the restated lease is $2.78 million, said Kian Kamas, the city's
chief of economic development.

For the three, five-year renewal terms, the annual base rent will rise 4% each period,
equating to $2,898,475.84 for the first term, $3,014,414.87 for the second term and
$3,134,991.47 for third term, according to documents.

IC Bus may deduct a maintenance investment credit from base rent for each year, and it
must maintain a minimum of 1,200 qualifying employees each quarter.

“So long as IC Bus is making investments into maintenance items outlined in maintenance
plan, they can essentially count the value of those investments or the cost of those invest-
ments as a credit toward the rent,” Kamas said.

Money spent on all aspects of maintenance, which includes electrical, mechanical and
structural, will be deposited into a fund from which the city can make broader improve-
ments to Air Force Plant No. 3, Kamas said.

Every time a lease option is exercised, a new maintenance plan must be developed through
an independent engineer agreed upon by both parties, she said.

‘We want to make sure these buildings continue to be invested in and that they are main-
tained for the full term,” Kamas said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/20200529/page/1/textview 2/2
