2020. 6. 21. Black leaders criticize panel

Black leaders criticize panel
Gov. Stitt's panel on race lacked depth and perspective, leaders say

Tulsa World « 9 Jun 2020 - Ai « By Randy Krehbiel

Gov. Kevin Stitt's Sunday night panel discussion on race left a lot unsaid, two black legisla-
tors said Monday.

Ny

State Reps. Regina Goodwin, D-tulsa, and Jason Lowe, Doklahoma City, chair and vice
chair of the Legislative Black Caucus, said the discussion should have provided a broader
perspective and at times seemed tone deaf to the issues it was trying to address.

Charlie Hannema, Stitt's communications director, said the program was intended to be
the first of several and represents a “first step.”

“Gov. Stitt referred to the death of George Floyd (in Minnesota) and said, ‘We do not want
this to happen in Oklahoma,' ” Goodwin said in a written

statement. “This has already happened in Oklahoma. Elliott Williams, a black man with a
broken neck, died in custody; an unarmed Terence Crutcher was murdered by a police offi-
cer and both incidents were videotaped, among numerous other incidents of innocent
black people being murdered.”

Williams died in 2011 of injuries suffered and left untreated while in the Tulsa County jail.
Tulsa County ultimately agreed to pay $10 million to settle the lawsuit brought by Wil-
liams' family.

Crutcher was shot to death by Tulsa Police Officer Betty Shelby in 2016. A jury found Shelby
not guilty of manslaughter but questioned her suitability for policing and recommended
changes to TPD training. Shelby now works for the Rogers County Sheriff 's Office.
Goodwin said Stitt asked “What can elected officials do?” but has ignored reeommenda-
tions from her caucus, as has the rest of the state's leadership.

In recent sessions, Goodwin has particularly focused without success on strengthening
laws related to body-worn cameras, which are not always turned on during law enforce-
ment encounters with the public.

Sunday's panel consisted of Stitt and his wife, Sarah; Oklahoma City pastor Clarence Hill,
founder of faith-based Stronger Together; Moore Police Chief Todd Gibson; Cleveland
County Sheriff's Office Capt. Marcus Williams; and Oklahoma City pastor Herbert Cooper.
Three of the panelists were black, two were white and Stitt is a member of the Cherokee
Nation, although he is currently at odds with the tribe over gaming rights.

Some should thought the have ,included panel more women and other minorities as well as
people who have been on the front lines of recent protests.

“In Oklahoma, we have a deep bench of academics, civil rights leaders, activists and
elected officials who could have led the governor and panel in a difficult, yet extremely im-
portant conversation,” Lowe said in a written statement. “Instead of a substantial meeting
on inequity, we had a superficial show of solidarity.”
https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/20200609/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 21. Black leaders criticize panel

Hannema, in an email, said Stitt plans a future program with Tulsan Rose Washington, the
chief executive officer of TEDC Creative Capital. Washington is highly respected for her
work putting together financing for economic development in underserved parts of the
city, but she has not been front and center during the recent protests and discussions
sparked by Floyd's death while in police custody.

“(Stitt) made it clear during (Sunday's) event that it was one step of many, not a compre-
hensive one-time discussion,” Hannema said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/20200609/page/1/textview 2/2
