2020. 6. 21. Rally on the Green

Rally on the Green

Tulsa World - 12 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Stetson Payne and Kyle Hinchey

With lawn chairs, plenty of signs and a truckload of bottled water, protesters converged on
Guthrie Green on Thursday evening for the Rally for Black Lives.

   

Seas ss

The crowd, which peaked with more than 1,000 people on the green, along Reconciliation
Way and at the pavilion, was one of the latest in a string of ongoing protests in the wake of
George Floyd's death under the knee of a police officer in Minneapolis.

But Thursday night's gathering was the first such large-scale protest since President Don-
ald Trump announced that he will host his first campaign rally since the COVID-19 shut-
down at the BOK Center on June 19.

The Rev. Robert Turner of Tulsa's Vernon African Methodist Episcopal Church spoke to re-
porters at the rally and said he wants to see the president speak to issues such as police
brutality and reparations. He said he's through with hearing any more rhetoric.

“We're tired of political speeches. We're tired of campaign speeches,” Turner said. “We
need action. He's in office right now, and we want to see some action.”

Beyond the looming news of a presidential visit, Turner said the people of Tulsa were
“truly remarkable” in their turnout for Thursday's rally, and he added that he wishes “the
leadership of Tulsa reflected the people of Tulsa.”

Turner also spoke on other issues, including the cancellation of the A&E television show
“Live PD,” fallout from Mayor G.T. Bynum's interview with “CBS Sunday Morning” and
comments Tulsa Police Department Maj. Travis Yates made on a local radio program.
Although Turner said he welcomed the apology the mayor posted on Facebook on Wednes-
day and commended Bynum's earlier decision to no longer have Tulsa police participate in
“Live PD,” more has to be done concerning Yates' comments, he said.

“T think it says a lot about the culture in our Police Department and what they're willing to
uphold,” Turner said. “I'm supposed to feel safe when I'm stopped by a Tulsa Police
Department officer? No way when I know that the highest level of the department thinks
like that.”

The rally itself saw speakers and performers, as well as a large voter registration effort
among the crowd.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/202006 12/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 21. Rally on the Green

Ranesha Smith, a poet who spoke early in the lineup, said she wants to see the inspiration
in Thursday night's crowd carry past Guthrie Green and translate to real change.

“T hope that this really starts a conversation not just in Tulsa but in Broken Arrow, in
Jenks, in Owasso,” Smith said. “Let this black lives matter rally stretch all the way to the
sticks of Oklahoma, because we need it to count, especially for those who feel like they
don't have a voice.

“Just don't talk to us. What leaders are saying to us now is just talking to us. We want the
change. We want your words to line up with your actions. ...

“I'm very hopeful seeing this reach globally that we can stop talking about it and actually
start putting our foot in the sand of walking toward that change.”

Kyle Hinchey 918-581-8451

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/202006 12/page/1/textview 2/2
