2020. 6. 21. Officials: Gaming is state matter

Officials: Gaming is state matter
Lawmakers ask state Supreme Court to take over part of compact suit

Tulsa World « 5 Jun 2020 - Ai « By Randy Krehbiel

OKLAHOMA CITY — Oklahoma's top two legislative leaders interjected themselves into the
gaming lawsuit between Gov. Kevin Stitt and several tribal governments on Thursday by
asking the Oklahoma Supreme Court to assume original jurisdiction over a portion of the
proceedings.

OURDOORS .¢
AREOPEN ,/ ~

 

COME ON IN!
OR PHONE IN YOURQRDER + FREE SHIPPING!
SAS aa Ag i io sie ee o eas wert

Senate President Pro Tem Greg Treat, R-oklahoma City, and House Speaker Charles Mc-
call, R-atoka, want the state Supreme Court, not a federal judge, to decide whether Stitt
has the right to effectively expand the scope of Indian gaming in the state without the con-
sent of the Legislature.

Stitt is locked in a lawsuit with several tribes over whether their gaming compacts with the
state expired on Dec. 31. Simultaneously, in April, he signed new compacts with the Otoe-
missouria and Comanche that Mccall, Treat, Attorney General Mike Hunter and the other
tribes say are not valid because they include forms of gambling not allowed under the Ok-
lahoma Indian Gaming Act.

Specifically, the compacts would allow sports betting and true house-banked games such
as blackjack, craps and roulette.

Last week Stitt asked Chief Federal District Judge Timothy Deguisti to suspend the lawsuit
proceedings until Degiusti rules on Hunter's May 5 opinion

that Stitt exceeded his authority.

It is that decision that Mccall and Treat want made in state court.

“Federal judges decide matters of federal law, not matters of state law, and at issue is a
matter of state law. Asking federal judges to decide a matter of state law is a dangerous in-
trusion into states' rights,” Treat said in a joint press release with Mccall.

Mccall, in an email to House Republicans, said Thursday's filing “is about much more than
gaming compacts. Had the state executive branch asked the federal judicial branch to make
a ruling concerning purely state law on some other matter — whether it be the Second
Amendment, abortion, healthcare or anything else — this same type of legal response by
the legislative branch would be necessary to protect Oklahoma's rights and uphold the Ok-
lahoma Constitution, as we each swear an oath to do.

“This is not an action we wanted to take,” Mccall continued, “but unfortunately, the exec-
utive branch's legal action in the federal case — which was not communicated to the

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/20200605/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 21. Officials: Gaming is state matter

House or Senate in advance — thrust the state into an untenable position requiring us to
respond.”

Stephen Greetham, senior counsel for the Chickasaw Nation and the state's largest gaming
tribe, welcomed the legislative leaders' action.

“We deeply appreciate the leadership demonstrated today by President Pro Tem Treat and
Speaker Mccall,” Greetham said in a written statement. “The action they filed in the Okla-
homa Supreme Court is tailored to protect their constitutional role as Oklahoma's policy-
makers and will help get things back on the right track.”

Stitt notified the various tribes last summer that he considered their gaming compacts to
end on Dec. 31, 2019, and warned them that failure to negotiate new compacts with him
would result in most of the games in their casinos being declared illegal.

The tribes disagreed, pointing to language they said automatically renewed the compacts.
This issue is the one before Degiusti.

Although the tribes have for the most part put up a united front, Stitt was able to secure
agreements with the Otoe-missouri and Comanche, two mediumsized operations, in April.
Those agreements included sports betting, true house-banked games and provisions for
expansion into areas of the state now controlled by other tribes, including the Chickasaw.
There has been some grumbling that the larger gaming tribes, and particularly the Chicka-
saw, exert undue influence on gaming in the state. The Comanche treaty in particular could
potentially challenge Chickasaw market share.

The U.S. Department of Interior is required to accept or reject the Otoemissouria and Co-
manche compacts by Monday. Hunter has urged the department to reject them.
Thursday's lawsuit formally brings not only Treat and Mccall into the fray, but former Se-
nate President Pro Tem Glenn Coffee. An Oklahoma City attorney who still holds consider-
able influence in state politics, Coffee is attorney of record on Thursday's application to
the state Supreme Court and the accompanying brief.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/20200605/page/1/textview 2/2
