2020. 6. 21. Young people keep the peace at Tulsa Hills protest

Young people keep the peace at Tulsa Hills protest

Smaller group stays with its message, discourages conflict in latest march

Tulsa World + 3 Jun 2020 - Ai - By Samantha Vicent and Kelsy Schlotthauer

The evening hours in Tulsa were the calmest in three nights as more than 50 young people
gathered in the nearly empty Tulsa Hills shopping center Tuesday evening in a protest

dedicated to nonviolence.
PE

   
  

in | ou
Tuesday's assembly, which began loosely at 7 p.m., had a markedly different tone than the
protest Monday near 71st Street and Memorial Drive, where many of the same teenagers
were subject to the effects of multiple rounds of pepper balls and gas irritants deployed by
police amid vandalism reports.

But much like the Woodland Hills shopping area on Monday, many stores in Tulsa Hills
shut down early.

Target's windows and doors were boarded over. Cracker Barrel pulled its rocking chairs off
the porch, and Sam's Club closed down. The Target at 71st Street and U.S. 169 also had
closed earlier than normal amid fears of damage.

Organizers of Tuesday's protest at Tulsa Hills called themselves the Peace Movement, and
they wrangled participants for an impromptu meeting to reiterate that they were ready to
run off anyone who had plans to engage in violence or looting. A group of protesters desig-
nated as “medics” gathered in the western end of the Target parking lot first, recognizable
by red duct tape crosses over their clothing and vehicles.

By 10:50 p.m., the group moved from Town Center Drive north on Olympia Avenue toward
71st Street. Toward the beginning of the night, some leaders of the group told protesters
not to talk to media as part of the #Blackouttuesday social media campaign. But a vocal
participant, Ashley, who declined to give her last name,

said she steered them in a different direction in part after observing local TV stations com-
ply with a request from Tulsa police to terminate their Facebook Live broadcasts of the po-
lice response to the conflict at 71st Street and Memorial Drive on Monday night.

A Tulsa Police Department spokeswoman said early Tuesday that the agency was con-
cerned that the news feeds could be an incentive for acts of vandalism, though the majority
of those present were streaming the scene on Facebook and putting it on Snapchat.

“I appreciate the way Blackout started, like the thought process of it, and everyone that
wanted to ally and support against it, that's actually pretty beautiful,” Ashley said. “But

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/20200603/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 21. Young people keep the peace at Tulsa Hills protest

honestly it's not helping; it's censoring. Because what happens is if we're not talking about
it, we're not saying (George Floyd's) name.

“We're not saying Breonna Taylor's. We're not saying Terence Crutcher's or Trayvon
Martin's. Then people aren't talking about it. And right now we have a major censorship
problem going on anyways.”

Demonstrators who marched on Saturday and Sunday were older and more directly affili-
ated with existing organizations or churches in the Tulsa area as they processed the killing
of George Floyd by thenminneapolis Police Officer Derek Chauvin. More than 1,000 people
took to the streets Saturday in Brookside, filling the roadway from just south of 31st Street
on Peoria Avenue for a march that went to Interstate 44 and Lewis Avenue before returning
to Peoria.

But on Sunday night Tulsa police deployed pepper balls and tear gas in Brookside three
times, alleging that protesters either threw items in their direction or refused to listen to
orders to keep their distance. One of the deployments took place after officers responded to
reports of damaged windows at a consignment store and a pawn shop on Peoria just north
of I-44.

Police received assistance from the Oklahoma Army National Guard on Monday after say-
ing they struggled to respond efficiently to reports of damage at the numerous businesses
in the 71st Street and Memorial Drive corridor. Officers made at least four arrests on Mon-
day, including one of a teenager accused of attempting to incite a riot by throwing items in
the direction of police and Guard soldiers.

The teenager arrested is not affiliated with Black Lives Matter or any other organization
that helped coordinate the weekend protests.

Police and soldiers used pepper balls and tear gas to force the teenagers to clear parking
lots Monday night, saying the assembly became unlawful when people tried to throw items
in the direction of authorities.

Kelsy Schlotthauer 918-581-8455

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/20200603/page/1/textview 2/2
