2020. 6. 21. “We're all in this together’

“We're all in this together’

Tulsa World - 8 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Michael Overall

After marching half a mile on a 93-degree afternoon, Pastor Paul Daugherty knelt on the
blistering asphalt to end Sunday's rally with prayer.

 

ek) ee

“Only God can heal our nation,” Daugherty told a diverse crowd of several hundred people
who walked in Victory Christian's Peaceful March for Racial Healing, beginning and ending
in the church's parking lot near 81st

Avenue.

Marchers sung “This Little Light of Mine” and other gospel tunes, carried signs with
“Love your neighbor” and other scriptural references, and invited uniformed sheriff's
deputies to lead the way a quarter-mile down Lewis Avenue and back.

One of Tulsa's largest congregations, the church wanted to offer an alternative to more
boisterous protests that have swept across Tulsa

Street and

Lewis

and the rest of the country since the death of George Floyd on May 25, organizers said.
‘“‘We wanted to make a statement about the issues that are dividing our country,” said
Sharon Daugherty, who co-founded the church in 1981 and turned leadership over to her
son in 2014.

“Man can build things but God has to be at the center if it's going to last. It will be a super-
natural thing.”

Marchers included Don Ailsworth, who served in the Los Angeles Police Department before
moving to Tulsa about 30 years ago, originally to seek treatment at Oral Roberts Univer-
sity's now-defunct City of Faith hospital.

Four years ago, Ailsworth

attended a protest over the death of 40-yearold Terence Crutcher, a black motorist who
was killed by a white police officer in Tulsa. And on the same day in September 2016,
Ailsworth also attended a rally to support the police, telling news reporters at the time that
people choose sides.

“Love one another,” he said in a quote that ran in several newspapers across the country.
“Hatred isn't going to work.”

His message changed.

Love unites people of all shouldn't between have to the two hasn't colors, Ailsworth told
the crowd Sunday after the pastor handed him a bullhorn.

“One God. One faith. One baptism,” he said. “We're all in this together.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/20200608/page/1/textview 4/1
