2020. 6. 21. Tulsa FOP opposes oversight program

Tulsa FOP opposes oversight program

Police union leader says mayor's OIM proposal still wrong solution a year
later

Tulsa World - 3 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Kevin Canfield

The local police union came out Tuesday against Mayor G.T. Bynum's renewed effort to
create a police oversight program, saying the proposed model could lead to more violent
crime while doing nothing to increase trust between police officers and the public.

“It is the same thing that he said almost a year ago; it was the Denver model then,” said
Jerad Lindsey, chairman of the Tulsa Fraternal Order of Police. “We educated and

showed folks that the Denver model dramatically increased violent crime and did not show
an increase of trust within the community once implemented.”

Lindsey didn't provide examples, and the World was not able to verify these claims.
Bynum announced Monday that he plans to work with a group of community advocates to
move forward with the creation of an Office of the Independent Monitor that would be
similar to the one established in Denver.

Creation of the OIM would be a two-step process. The first step would be to pass an ordi-
nance creating the office with only limited powers because the city's contract with the po-
lice union requires that any policy or procedure that changes officers' working conditions
be negotiated through collective bargaining.

The second step would be to do that negotiating with the police union to give the OIM ad-
ditional powers similar to those bestowed upon the Denver OIM.

In announcing his plan to move forward with the Office of the Independent Monitor,
Bynum said he had not made it clear last year that his intent all along was to create an OIM
as close to the Denver model as possible.

His proposal last year called for the office to have three primary responsibilities: to follow
up on citizen complaints about police and review Tulsa Police Department Internal Affairs'
investigations of use-of-force incidents; to review best practices for police and make pol-
icy recommendations; and to conduct community outreach.

But Lindsey insisted Tuesday that the current and former Denver law enforcement officers
he has spoken with had nothing good to say about that city's police oversight program.
“They said, ‘Don't walk away from this plan — run away from it. It's terrible. It doesn't re-
duce crime; it doesn't increase trust; it doesn't increase transparency. It becomes a bu-
reaucratic bureaucracy within the government,'” he said.

The program would contribute to increased crime by creating a disincentive for officers to
do their jobs because they would be worried about the process being rigged against them, a
lack of due process and the chance that frivolous claims could be filed against said.

“Then your entire career revolves around not getting into trouble,” he said. “What's the
easiest way not to get in trouble? Don't do anything. Don't do anything anywhere. They all

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/20200603/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 21. Tulsa FOP opposes oversight program

end up sitting in parking lots behind buildings all night.”

Bynum said Tuesday evening that public safety is the most important service city govern-
ment provides.

“The citizens of Tulsa empower our officers to use force when necessary, and it is impor-
tant that an independent third party review those instances,” Bynum said.

“T have a lot of respect for the leadership of the FOP, and I believe we both agree on the
value of that third party review. Our difference of opinion comes down to which entity
should be doing the review.

“T look forward to discussing their concerns directly. The goal here is to establish an office
that benefits both citizens and officers.” them,

Lindsey

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/20200603/page/1/textview 2/2
