2020. 6. 21. NCAA hits OSU with ban

NCAA hits OSU with ban

Men's basketball program gets probation, postseason ban, loses scholar-
ships

Tulsa World - 6 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Frank Bonner Il

The NCAA hit the Oklahoma State men's basketball program with a three-year probation
and a postseason ban in 2020-21 following an FBI investigation into college basketball.
The program was also hit with a reduction of three

total scholarships from 2020-21 through 2022-23.

As a result of the FBI'S twoyear investigation into college basketball, Oklahoma State re-
ceived a notice of allegations from the NCAA for a potential Level I violation last Novem-
ber.

A now former staff member — associate head coach and recruiting coordinator Lamont
Evans — was accused of knowingly soliciting and receiving benefits to arrange meetings
between players and financial advisers between April 2016 and September 2017, according
to the notice from the NCAA that was voluntarily disclosed by the university last year.
Oklahoma State athletic director Mike Holder and head coach Mike Boynton expressed
their frustrations about the penalties during a video conference Friday.

“I find it almost impossible to reconcile the severe penalties imposed by the NCAA for the
violations that were detailed in today's report,” Holder said. “The NCAA agreed that La-
mont Evans acted alone and for his own benefit. The NCAA also agreed that OSU did not
benefit in recruiting, commit a recruiting violation, did not play an ineligible player and
did not display a lack of institutional control.”

Holder went on to say that the NCAA agreed OSU cooperated throughout the entire process.
OSU did the right thing, Holder said. He stated Evans acted selfishly for personal gain
without regard to the student-athletes or the university

“Given this context, how does the NCAA justify a postseason ban and the loss of three
scholarships for violations that damaged the university and basketball program?” Holder
said. “Penalties that are normally reserved for those seeking a substantial or extensive re-
cruiting or competitive advantage. I'm shocked by the ruling today and determined to vig-
orously fight against this injustice.”

Evans, who was originally hired by former head coach Brad Underwood and retained by
current coach Mike Boynton, was fired in 2017 after federal charges were announced,
stemming from an undercover sting that involved three other college basketball assistant
coaches. Evans ultimately was sentenced to three months in prison for bribery.

The NCAA ruling released Friday said Evans received at least $18,150 in bribes from finan-
cial advisers to influence studentathletes. The November notice named Marty Blazer and
Munish Sood as the two advisors who offered Evans money in exchange for setting up
meetings with at least two players, including one from a previous coaching stop (South
Carolina) in an attempt to influence the players to retain their services.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/20200606/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 21. NCAA hits OSU with ban

One of those players received $300 from Evans, had to go through the reinstatement
process to become eligible after the payment and then had to hire an attorney to be ques-
tioned by the FBI.

Although Boynton was never mentioned in any of the allegations that occurred, he and his
players are left to deal with the consequences. Boynton said he made a point to call every
returning and incoming player to break the news to them personally before they heard it
elsewhere.

“T sit here extremely frustrated and really disappointed for this program but most impor-
tantly for the players in our program, “Boynton said. “Many of which weren't a part of our
program when this began and has absolutely very minimal knowledge of anything that
even happened in this case. I feel bad for them and I certainly hope that through the ap-
peals process we can understand more how terribly impactful this can be for their careers
and their futures.”

Oklahoma State said in a statement Friday it will file an immediate appeal. June 20 is the
deadline to file an appeal. The Infractions Appeal Committee will hear the appeal as the fi-
nal step in the NCAA infractions process.

OSU did not dispute the NCAA'S findings, but Holder said the hearing that happened in Fe-
bruary was to express how OSU didn't believe Evans' actions should be a Level I violation
for the program. Level I violations can be punished by postseason bans, scholarship reduc-
tions and show-cause orders against those involved.

“A Level I for Lamont Evans, yeah absolutely,” Holder said. “But not Level I for Oklahoma
State University. We were a victim. So we felt like it was more Level 2.”

Aggravation, standard and mitigation are the three tiers of Level I violation. Aggravation
has a two to four-year postseason ban, standard has a one- to two-year ban and mitiga-
tion is zero to a one-year ban. OSU received a standard Level I penalty.

“T don't think that what happened at our school deserves standard classification,” Holder
said. “I think it's more mitigation.”

Boynton agreed a postseason ban was too harsh a penalty.

“In any given time in the last three years, my name has never come up in any of this stuff,”
Boynton said. “So I was thoroughly disappointed in the way the NCAA decided to hand out
penalties that will certainly impact people's lives who had absolutely nothing to do with
this case. Maybe probation I could see. Maybe some reduction in recruiting activities. Even
though there were no recruiting violations here, I could probably get around justifying that
in my mind. But in terms of a postseason ban for a group of kids who were probably 15 and
16 years old when this stuff was going on is completely, completely out of balance.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/20200606/page/1/textview 2/2
