2020. 6. 21. Dems propose sweeping police overhaul

Dems propose sweeping police overhaul

Democrats in Congress propose far-reaching overhaul of police procedures
and accountability

Tulsa World - 9 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Lisa Mascaro

WASHINGTON — Democrats in Congress proposed a far-reaching overhaul of police pro-
cedures and accountability Monday, a sweeping legislative response to the mass protests
denouncing the deaths of black Americans in the hands of law enforcement.

1

 

The political outlook is deeply uncertain for the legislation in a polarized election year.
President Donald Trump is staking out a tough “law and order” approach in the face of the
outpouring of demonstrations and demands to reimagine policing in America.

“We cannot settle for anything less than transformative structural change,” said

Page A4

hallowed ground,” Neal told the crowd. “In 1921, because of hate, because of fear, because
of jealousy, people lost lives, property and, in a sense, a community, because people did
not stand up and say, “This is not what we are about.' ”

Joining Neal, the Rev. Warren Blakney said the recent video of George Floyd's death under
the knee of a Minneapolis police officer was an all too painful reminder of the violence he
witnessed firsthand during the 1960s civil rights marches in the South.

“As I sat there watching, I could hardly hold back the tears. Because I saw my grandchild. I
saw my son. I saw every child in the church where I preach,” said Blakney, of North Peoria
Church of Christ.

“We can't keep quiet anymore,” he added. “What I encourage us to do today and tomorrow
and the next day and the day after that is if all you've got is your voice, then use your
voice.”

In his comments to marchers, former Tulsa Police Chief Drew Diamond, executive director
of the Tulsa Jewish Federation, called out both Mayor G.T. Bynum and the city's police
union.

“We have a mayor who says racially biased policing is not real, that thousands of citizens
of this city who are black or brown — that their testimonies are not true,” Diamond said.
“We have a Fraternal

Order of Police that comes out and says we don't need any oversight.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/20200609/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 21. Dems propose sweeping police overhaul

Diamond added: “All politics are local. All policing is local. This is about us. This is about
what we want to do in Tulsa, Oklahoma. And this is about saying to the mayor, ‘It's time,
Mr. Mayor, you become accountable.'”

Activist Greg Robinson, an organizer of the recent We Can't Breathe protest in Tulsa, fired
up the crowd at City Hall, leading a chant of “Hands up. Don't shoot.”

“Coming together sounds cool. Unity sounds good. You know what sounds better? Justice,”
Robinson went on to say. “What sounds better than a false peace is justice.”

Robinson reiterated the demands of police reformers in Tulsa, including the need for an
Office of the Independent Monitor. He said having that office would've helped after the
death of Terence Crutcher, who was fatally shot by then-tulsa Police Officer Betty Shelby
in 2016.

“Betty Shelby didn't get convicted not because she wasn't guilty,” Robinson said. “The
reason was because there wasn't a system of oversight and accountability to ensure that
there was a real, adequate investigation into the killing. That's why we must have an Office
of the Independent Monitor.”

Prayer was a central part of the event, both before and after the march. Among the several
ministers who led prayers outside City Hall was the Rev. Layla Caldwell.

“We thank you, Father God, for allowing us to come together as one. United we stand; di-
vided we fall,” said Caldwell, pastor of Agape Outreach Ministries.

The Rev. Paul Daugherty of Victory Church, one of Tulsa's

largest congregations, addressed the crowd before he prayed.

“There is no superior race,” he said. “We are all family of God.

“TI want to repent (for) the sins that have happened in our nation that have come from
white people towards black people,” Daugherty added. “I want to pray right now specifi-
cally for Tulsa, for what happened almost 100 years ago, and that God will bring healing in
our city.”

Daugherty led a march in south Tulsa for racial healing on Sunday.

Neal said he asked Daugherty to be a part of the march Monday “after hearing his words
yesterday. And the first words out of his mouth were: “What do you need? What can I do?
I'm ready to be of service.'”

“That's what we need,” Neal added. “We need people who are ready to focus on making
change.”

The march was organized in part so that he and the other ministers could speak with “one
voice,” Neal said.

“We are standing together to say that we want change,” he added.

“It is our duty not just as citizens, but it is our moral obligation, to make sure each and ev-
ery individual that lives in these United States has the right to live without fear of dying.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/20200609/page/1/textview 2/2
