2020. 6. 21. Leaders mark events of 1921

Leaders mark events of 1921

TULSA RACE MASSACRE - Commemoration event held live online

Tulsa World « 1 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Andrea Eger

Sunday's commemoration of the 99th anniversary of the Tulsa Race Massacre was not just
a call to remember but also to actively participate in preparing for next year's centennial.

eo rie os

   

The 1921 Tulsa Race Massacre Centennial Commission's event was broadcast live online
from the Mabel B. Little House, 322 N. Greenwood Ave., and featured remarks by local,
state and national leaders.

It opened with a surprise appearance by David Lindelof, creator and executive producer of
HBO'S wildly popular TV series “Watchmen,” which begins with the Tulsa Race Massacre.
“Even though it was presented in the context of a fictional story,

what happened in Greenwood was real,” said Lindelof, who recited a memorable line from
his series — “Wounds need air.”

“Today's event is that air — the more we talk about Greenwood, the more air we give to its
memory.”

Viewers of the series had the same shocked reaction as Lindelof 's own, upon learning the
truth about what event host Phil Armstrong, project director with the 1921 Tulsa Race
Massacre Centennial Commission, called “one of the least known acts of racially motivated
violence in American history.”

He had a message for fans and future viewers of “Watchmen,” who feel a call to action
after gaining this knowledge: “Continue to give it air — to tell the story of what happened.
But you can also give support, whatever you can, to Greenwood Rising,” a new museum
being planned for the southeast corner of North Greenwood Avenue and East Archer Street.
Lt. Gov. Matt Pinnell, noted that he grew up only five minutes from the historic Greenwood
District, but learned very little about the events of May 31, 1921, during his formative edu-
cation in Tulsa.

He, too, called for support for the Greenwood Rising museum.

“We firmly believe this will be a pilgrimage-type of opportunity from all cultures all over
the world to come to the center of the country, the hub of America, to learn about how we
defeat racism and bigotry in this country,” Pinnell said. “We are going to take direction
from you, but I assure you, the state of Oklahoma, we will be with you every step of the
Way.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/20200601/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 21. Leaders mark events of 1921

Also providing recorded remarks was Sen. James Lankford, R-oklahoma, whom Armstrong
called “a longtime supporter and friend of the commission.”

“Ninety-nine years ago, the city of Tulsa was on fire. Hundreds of African Americans lay
dead in the street. Thousands of African Americans were homeless. It was the tail end of
the worst race massacre in American history,” Lankford said. “We should pause, we
should remember and we should see if there are things we can still learn, and see what we
can do to be able to grow in the future.”

State Sen. Kevin Matthews, D-tulsa, and founder and chairman of the race massacre com-
mission, read a written statement “from one of our top supporters,” former presidential
candidate Mike Bloomberg.

“As the people of Tulsa and all around the nation mark the 99th anniversary of the Green-
wood massacre this weekend, let us all recommit ourselves to the kinds of changes we
need to make in our governments and communities to build a future — as I said in Tulsa
earlier this year — where color and capital are no longer related, and where the promise of
American equality rings true in every community,” read the statement from

Bloomberg.

Matthews called on every Tulsa resident, elected official, corporation, nonprofit, church,
school, and every tourism and economic development entity in the state “to come together
and be part of the upcoming centennial.”

Tulsa Mayor G.T. Bynum told the story of Dr. A.C. Jackson, a noted surgeon during the early
20th century who invented surgical tools still in use today.

After tending to the injured from the massacre into the wee hours of the night at Booker T.
Washington Hospital in Tulsa, he returned to his home, only to be confronted on the street
the following morning by a group of white men.

“He raised his hands to surrender to them and they shot him anyway,” Bynum said. “Dr.
Jackson, at the age of 40, one of the foremost surgeons in the entire country at time, was
killed solely because he was a black man in Tulsa ... Dr. Jackson's story is a reminder to us
of how important it is that we tell the stories of those who died and also those who rebuilt
following the 1921 Tulsa Race Massacre. That is why the city of Tulsa has made it a priority
to identify the missing graves from the 1921 Race Massacre.”

Tulsa Police Chief Wendell Franklin noted that his predecessor had already formally apol-
ogized for being “complicit” in the massacre, and he vowed that the police department is
committed to becoming grounded in relationship-based, community policing.

“As Tulsa's first black police chief, I represent progress. What I don't represent is mission
accomplished,” said Franklin. “We have much work to do in the realm of race relations.”
Closing remarks were made by Brenda Alford, whose grandparents survived the massacre,
along with their 2-year-old daughter, but lost their businesses.

She read a quote from that former 2-year-old, her survivor aunt Cecelia Nails Palmer, who
grew up and helped open academia's doors to fellow African Americans.

She earned her doctorate from Oklahoma State University, where she was the first black
instructor in the English Department. Then, in 1970, she became the first black faculty
member at the University of Tulsa.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/20200601/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 21. Leaders mark events of 1921

““There is no such thing as standing still when change comes and all traditions are de-
stroyed. When we have no past, we have no future,'” Alford read.

Watch the webcast of the event at facebook.com/tulsatriumphs2021/ or at tulsa2021.0rg/

For complete Tulsa World coverage of the massacre, go to tulsaworld.com/racemassacre.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/20200601/page/1/textview

3/3
