2020. 6. 21. Unemployment drops to 13.3% The rate fell unexpectedly in May as states loosened lockdowns and businesses began recalling w...

Unemployment drops to 13.3% The rate fell unexpectedly in
May as states loosened lockdowns and businesses began re-
calling workers

Tulsa World - 6 Jun 2020 - Ai: By Christopher Rugaber

WASHINGTON — U.S. unemployment dropped unexpectedly in May to 13.3% as reopened
businesses began recalling millions of workers faster than economists had predicted, trig-
gering a big rally Friday on Wall Street and giving President Donald Trump something to
boast about in his reelection bid.

== a 4 ——

   
 

The jobless rate is still on par with what the nation witnessed during the Great Depression.
And for the second straight month, the Labor Department acknowledged making errors in
counting the unemployed during the coronavirus outbreak, saying the real figure is worse
than the numbers indicate.

Still, after weeks of dire predictions by economists that unemployment in May could hit
20% or more, the news that the economy added a surprising 2.5 million jobs last month is
evidence that the employment collapse most likely bottomed out in April, when the

rate reached 14.7%.

Most economists had expected rehiring to kick in this summer as lockdowns were increas-
ingly lifted and people gradually resumed shopping and eating out.

“The surprising thing here is the timing and that it happened as quickly as it did,” said
Adam Kamins, senior regional economist at Moody's Analytics.

At the same time, economists warn that after an initial burst of hiring as businesses re-
open, the recovery could slow in the fall or early next year unless most Americans are con-
fident that they can shop, travel, eat out and fully return to their other spending habits
without fear of contracting the virus.

“We are witnessing the easiest phase of growth as people come off temporary layoffs and
come back to their employers,” said

Jason Furman, a Harvard economist and former top adviser in the Obama White House.
“And once employers are done recalling people, the much harder, longer work of recovery
will have to proceed.”

On Wall Street, the Dow Jones Industrial Average gained nearly 830 points, more than 3%,
and the S&P 500 closed 2.6% higher on the news. The S&P is now just 5.7% below its
prepandemic peak after plummeting 34%.

An exultant Trump seized on the report as evidence that the economy is going to come
back from the coronavirus crisis like a “rocket ship.”

“This shows that what we've been doing is right,” said the president, who has pushed
governors aggressively to reopen their economies amid warnings from public health offi-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/20200606/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 21. Unemployment drops to 13.3% The rate fell unexpectedly in May as states loosened lockdowns and businesses began recalling w...

cials that the country is risking a second wave of infections on top of the one that has al-
ready killed over 100,000 Americans.

Kamins and other economists credited the government's small-business lending effort,
the Paycheck Protection Program, with encouraging employers to rehire. Overall, Wash-
ington has provided about $3 trillion in emergency relief funds during the crisis.

Nearly all industries added jobs last month, a sharp reversal from April, when almost all
cut them. Hotels and restaurants added 1.2 million jobs in May after shedding 7.5 million.
Retailers gained 368,000 after losing nearly 2.3 million in the previous month. Construc-
tion companies added 464,000 after cutting 995,000.

The crisis has also exposed wide disparities that may have contributed to the unrest set off
in many U.S. cities by the death last week of George Floyd: While the unemployment rate
for white Americans was 12.4% in May, it was 17.6% for Hispanics and 16.8% for African-
americans.

Solid employment gains will probably continue through the end of the year, economists
said, but the job market is in such a deep hole that it could take years to dig out. The U.S.
economy still has 20 million fewer jobs than it did in February.

Oxford Economics, a consulting firm, forecasts that 60% of jobs could be regained by the
end of this year, leaving unemployment in the 8%-to-10% range.

There are other signs the economy is steadily recovering, even in hardhit industries.
American Airlines said it will fly 55% of its U.S. routes in July, up from 20% in May. And the
Cheesecake Factory said one-quarter of its nearly 300 restaurants have reopened, though
with capacity.

Some economists say, however, that the longer the economy struggles, the more perma-
nent damage may occur. Movie theater chain AMC, for example, said Wednesday that it
might not survive.

Friday's report showed that the government continues to struggle with how it classifies
millions of out-of-work Americans. The Labor Department admitted that government
household survey-takers mistakenly counted about 4.9 million temporarily laid-off peo-
ple as employed.

The government doesn't correct its survey results for fear that it would look like political
manipulation.

Had the mistake been corrected, the unemployment rate would have risen to 16.1% in May,
while the corrected April figure would have been 19.5%, rather than 14.7%. limited

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/20200606/page/1/textview 2/2
