2020. 6. 21. America observes a more subdued Memorial Day.

America observes a more subdued Memorial Day.

Americans settled for small processions and online tributes

Tulsa World + 26 May 2020 - Ai - By Amy Forliti and Matthew Brown

BILLINGS, Mont. — Americans settled for small processions and online tributes instead of
parades Monday as they observed Memorial Day in the shadow of the pandemic, which
forced communities to honor the nation's military dead with modest, more subdued cere-
monies that also remembered those lost to the coronavirus.

  

On the weekend that marked the unofficial start of summer, authorities warned people
heading to beaches, parks or backyard barbecues to heed social-distancing rules to avoid a
resurgence of the disease that has infected 5.4 million people worldwide and killed over
345,000, including nearly 100,000 Americans, according to a tally by Johns Hopkins
University.

Memorial Day commemorations were canceled or toned down across the country. Veter-
ans, along with nursing home residents, have made up a significant portion of those who
died in the U.S. outbreak.

Frank Groblebe and his wife placed lilacs on several graves at Mountview Cemetery in
Billings, Montana, including those of his mother and father, who served in the Philippines
as a Navy Seabee during World War II. Groblebe said he approved of plans to curtail the
ceremony, which included a motorcycle procession and moments of quiet remembrance.
“This is our freedom. This is our history. It's what they fought for,” Groblebe said, briefly
choking up with tears. “Anything that shows respect for it is all right with me.”

Sharon Oakland placed mums on the grave of her father, also a Navy veteran in World War
II. She watched from a distance as the motorcycles rolled by. “What they've done is re-
markable given what's going on with the virus,” she said.

The day looked different across the U.S. The 37,000 American flags traditionally placed on
the Boston Common to honor Massachusetts military members who died in service were
replaced with just 1,000 flags, to limit volunteers and onlookers. In Minneapolis, several
bagpipers and drummers lined up outside the Minnesota Veterans Home and played as a
parade of cars drove past.

The city of Woodstock, Georgia, held its ceremony online. American Legion Post 316 Com-
mander Julian Windham recognized service members who helped in the global fight
against COVID-19.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/20200526/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 21. America observes a more subdued Memorial Day.

“Even when the enemy is an invisible virus or a microscopic germ, the sacrifices made are
just as meaningful,” Windham said. The ceremony, which included readings, vocal perfor-
mances and gun salute from a ceremonial rifle team, were filmed over a series of days last
week and edited together, Windham said.

In Chicago, a neighborhood group that's been holding a parade for more than a half cen-
tury also moved its event online, with video clips from previous years and messages from
special guests, including veterans and Mayor Lori Lightfoot.

Fallen military members were honored in New York City with car convoys and small cere-
monies.

“It's something we're upset about, but we understand,” said Raymond Aalbue, chairman
of the United Military Veterans of Kings County, which usually puts on a parade in Brook-
lyn. There's “no reason to put anybody in harm's way,” he said, adding “it's really cutting
quick to the heart of all the veterans.”

New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo joined a private ceremony at the Intrepid Sea, Air & Space
Museum in Manhattan, with both the sacrifices of military members and the challenge of
the coronavirus on his mind.

“Over 100,000 Americans will lose their lives to this COVID virus. How do we honor them?
We honor them by growing stronger together,” he said.

Presumptive Democratic presidential nominee Joe Biden made his first in-person appear-
ance in more than two months, laying a wreath at a veterans park near his Delaware home.
He wore a face mask as he and his wife bowed their heads in silence. He saluted and could
be heard saying “Never forget.”

Biden told reporters, “I feel great to be out here.” He also yelled to a group standing
nearby, “Thank you for your service.”

After two days of playing golf, President Donald Trump visited Arlington National Ceme-
tery, where he laid a wreath at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier, which overlooks rolling
hills dotted with white tombstones. He later spoke at Baltimore's historic Fort Mchenry,
noting that tens of thousands of service members and national guard personnel are cur-
rently “on the front lines of our war against this terrible virus.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/20200526/page/1/textview 2/2
