2020. 6. 21. Masks and distancing urged North Tulsa COVID-19 testing event

Masks and distancing urged North Tulsa COVID-19 testing
event

Health Department notes risk of spreading virus during demonstrations

Tulsa World - 4 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Tim Stanley

With all the recent public protests and demonstrations, city health officials are encourag-
ing proper precautions in hope of limiting the potential spread of COVID-19.

—4- |

  

ee
“It's difficult to social distance with large gatherings, and they can become a conduit for
transmission of diseases like COVID-19,” said Leanne Stephens, Tulsa City-county Health
Department spokeswoman.

‘While we respect those exercising their right for peaceful assembly, we want to encour-
age people using their voice to do so safely.”

Stephens added that wearing a mask is especially important.

“Also, bring hand sanitizer if soap and water aren't available to you, and maintain that
social distance as much as possible,”

What: Free COVID-19 testing without an appointment

When: 4-7 p.m. Friday

Where: Greater Union Baptist Church, 955 E. 36th St. North. The testing will be offered by
Tulsa Health Department, and is part of the Unity in the Community food distribution
event.

For more information: Call 918-582-9355 or go online to tulsa-health.org.

she said.

Officials say it's much too soon to say what the public health impact will be of the recent
protesting. But they hope to keep it minimal.

Stephens said in the images from the protests, “I saw a lot of masks, which is great.”

the first time with aiding and abetting second-degree murder and seconddegree man-
slaughter. All four were fired last week.

The new charges were sought by Minnesota Attorney General Keith Ellison, who called the
protests unleashed by the death “dramatic and necessary” and said Floyd “should be here
and he is not.”

“His life had value, and we will seek justice,” said Ellison, who cautioned that winning
convictions would be hard and said that public pressure had no bearing on his decisions.
Hundreds of protesters were in New York City's Washington Square Park when the charges
were announced.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/20200604/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 21. Masks and distancing urged North Tulsa COVID-19 testing event

“It's not enough,” protester Jonathan Roldan said, insisting all four officers should have
been charged from the start. “Right now, we're still marching because it's not enough that
they got arrested. There needs to be systematic change.”

Benjamin Crump, an attorney for Floyd's family, called it “a bittersweet moment” and “a
significant step forward on the road to justice.” Crump said Elison had told the family he
would continue his investigation into Floyd's death and upgrade the charge to first-degree
murder if warranted.

Chauvin was initially charged with third-degree murder and seconddegree manslaughter.
The move powerfully punctuated an unprecedented week, in which largely peaceful
protests took place in communities of all sizes but were rocked by bouts of violence, in-
cluding deadly attacks on officers, rampant thefts and arson in some places.

Some of the rockiness of the days since Floyd's May 25 death dissipated on Tuesday night,
with demonstrations continuing around the country, but without major reports of vio-
lence.

Curfews and efforts by protesters to contain earlier flare-ups of lawlessness were credited
with preventing more widespread damage to businesses in New York and other cities
overnight.

“Last night we took a step forward in moving out of this difficult period we've had the last
few days and moving to a better time,” New York Mayor Bill de Blasio said.

New York police said about 280 people were arrested on protest-related charges Tuesday
night, compared with 700 a day earlier. Nationwide, more than 9,000 have been arrested
in connection with unrest.

At least 12 deaths have been reported, though the circumstances in many cases are still be-
ing sorted out.

Some tense incidents continued Tuesday night, but were far less prevalent than in preced-
ing days. Police and National Guard troops used tear gas, flash-bang grenades, nonlethal
rounds and other means of dispersing crowds near a police precinct in Seattle, near Cen-
tennial Park in Atlanta

and at demonstrations in Tampa and St. Petersburg, Florida.

Minnesota has opened a civil rights investigation into whether the Minneapolis Police
Department has a pattern of discrimination against minorities.

President Donald Trump has pushed the nation's governors to take a hard line against the
violence, saying Tuesday that “lowlifes and losers” were taking over New York's streets.
He again tweeted Wednesday: “LAW & ORDER!”

Thousands of protesters again took to the streets again in the nation's capital, singing
“Amazing Grace” as they knelt. “We are not going anywhere!” they chanted.

Law enforcement officers in riot gear watched the crowd. Washington Mayor Muriel
Bowser imposed an 11 p.m. curfew after Tuesday's peaceful protests. The Tuesday curfew
had been 7 p.m.

Jade Jones, 30, said the protests would continue despite the new charges.

“That's the least they could do,” said Jones, who had been attending Washington protests
for days. “It's not going to wipe away 400 years of pain.

“We are glad there are additional charges, but that doesn't mean justice has been served.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/20200604/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 21. Masks and distancing urged North Tulsa COVID-19 testing event

More than 20,000 National Guard members have been called up in 29 states to deal with
the violence.

The protests have also taken root overseas amid growing global outrage over Floyd's
death, racial injustice and heavy-handed police tactics.

In Greece, police fired tear gas after young people attacked them Wednesday outside the
U.S. Embassy in Athens. Some 4,000 protesters had been peaceful until near the end of the
demonstration, when some threw gasoline bombs and stones at police. No injuries or ar-
rests were reported.

Meanwhile in Philadelphia, a statue of former Mayor Frank Rizzo was removed by the city
early Wednesday after repeatedly being targeted by vandals. Rizzo presided over a police
force widely accused of racism and brutality in the 1970s.

In Virginia, Gov. Ralph Northam was expected to announce plans Thursday for the removal
of an iconic statue of Confederate Gen. Robert E. Lee from Richmond's prominent Monu-
ment Avenue, a senior administration official told The Associated Press. The statue in the
former Confederate capital has been the target of vandalism during the protests.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/20200604/page/1/textview 3/3
