2020. 6. 21. Cities lift curfews amid peaceful protests

Cities lift curfews amid peaceful protests

New York City and Chicago lift curfews as police show less force; testing for
COVID-19 urged

Tulsa World - 8 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Jake Seiner, Kimberlee Kruesi and Lisa Marie Pane

NEW YORK — With New York City poised to reopen after a more than twomonth coron-
avirus shutdown, officials on Sunday lifted a curfew that was in place amid protests of po-
lice brutality and racial injustice. But they also urged that demonstrators be tested for
COVID-19.

   
 

“Get a test. Get a test,” New York Gov.

Andrew Cuomo told people who have been participating in rallies and marches in memory
of George Floyd. “I would act as if you were exposed, and I would tell people you are inter-
acting with, assume I am positive for the virus.”

Cuomo said the state would open 15 testing sites dedicated to protesters so they can get re-
sults quickly. His call for demonstrators to proceed carefully is similar to those made in
Seattle, San Francisco and Atlanta following massive demonstrations, with free testing for
protesters.

New York has been the epicenter of the U.S. outbreak, with black communities

hit especially hard.

The Rev. Brandon Watts of Epiphany Church in Brooklyn, was mindful of the pandemic
while organizing a “Pray & Protest” march with several other churches. He mandated that
protesters wear masks, and he came with boxes of them. Attendees also were offered free
coronavirus tests at one church.

“COVID-19 hit the inner city harder than anybody else,” Watts said. “And so we have to be
very careful. We're the only ones in a pandemic within a pandemic.”

In addition to suffering disproportionately from the virus, the black community also has
been roiled by the death of Floyd, a black man who died after a white officer pressed a knee
into his neck while arresting him.

Floyd's death sparked massive protests throughout the country and renewed calls to re-
form policing in America. A majority of the City Council in Minneapolis, where Floyd died,
said Sunday they support disbanding the police department. A heavy-handed police re-
sponse to protesters in many places has underscored what critics have maintained: Law
enforcement is militarized and too often uses excessive force.

Cities imposed curfews as several protests last week were marred by arson, assaults and
smash-and-grab raids on businesses. More than 10,000 people have been arrested around
the country since protests began, sometimes after violent confrontations with officers.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/20200608/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 21. Cities lift curfews amid peaceful protests

Videos have surfaced of officers in riot gear using tear gas or physical force against even
peaceful demonstrators.

But recent U.S. protests have been overwhelmingly peaceful — and over the weekend, sev-
eral police departments appeared to retreat from aggressive tactics.

Several cities have also lifted their curfews, including Chicago and New York City, which is
preparing to enter its first phase of reopening after virus shutdowns. Up to 400,000 people
are expected to head back to work Monday.

“Last night was the best by far,” Mayor Bill de Blasio said. “We had the biggest number of
protesters, the fewest arrests, the fewest problems and that convinced me it was time for
the curfew to go away.”

In Compton, California, several thousand protesters, some on horseback, peacefully
demonstrated Sunday through the city, just south of Los Angeles. The only law enforce-
ment presence was about a dozen sheriff's deputies.

A similar scene played out on Saturday when thousands of protesters converged on San
Francisco's Golden Gate Bridge. Tow trucks held off car traffic, and police directed vehicles
caught in the middle to go around protesters.

For the first time since protests began in New York, most NYPD officers were not wearing
riot helmets.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/20200608/page/1/textview 2/2
