2020. 6. 21. Major condemned

Major condemned

State representative calls for TPD major's firing

Tulsa World « 11 Jun 2020 - A1 - FROM STAFF REPORTS

A Tulsa police major's comments on a local radio show Tuesday drew a series of condem-
nations from community leaders and from his own police department Wednesday.
aoe es ; s / a

     

    

a

Mayor G.T. Bynum said the statements made by Maj. Travis Yates are the opposite of what
the Tulsa Police Department is trying to accomplish in the community. Other leaders said
they believe Yates should resign, and a state representative said he should be fired.

Yates spoke on the Pat Campbell Show on Talk Radio 1170 on Tuesday. He discussed “de-
funding the police,” chokeholds, police relations and policy. He denied the existence of
systemic racism several times and also discussed officer-involved shootings.

“By the way, all the research on this says ... we're shooting African-americans about 24%
less than we probably ought to be based on the crimes being committed,” Yates said, later
telling the Tulsa World he was referencing controversial research from an economist, as
well as a conservative commentator and the National Academy of Sciences.

“T want to believe he didn't intend to say what he did, but what he did say goes against ev-
erything we are trying to achieve in community policing,” Bynum wrote in a Facebook
post.

The Tulsa Police Department issued a statement saying it didn't “condone or support”
Yates' comments and that they are being reviewed by the Internal Affairs Unit.

Yates' statements also prompted a news conference from the president of the Tulsa Police
Department's Black Officers Coalition, who said the comments reflect a broader problem
with police.

“The issue is the culture of policing,” Tulsa Police Lt. Marcus Harper said. Harper specified
that he wasn't representing the Tulsa Police Department with his comments but was rep-
resenting the Black Officers Coalition.

“That's what we're fighting against — the culture of policing,” he said. “Because these are
the things that we've done historically. We've done them this way all the time.”

Harper said Yates has made similar controversial statements in recent years. He said he
believes that the statements represent Yates' views. Several

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/202006 11 /page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 21. Major condemned

times Harper mentioned Yates' statement: “... we're shooting African-americans about
24% less than we probably ought to be. ...”

“He said what he said, and he meant what he said,” Harper said. “It's like he's trying to
appease a certain audience, and that audience is the law enforcement community. What's
dangerous is when those inside of the law enforcement community are influenced by what
he says. ... That is the issue, and there's no way around it.”

During his radio interview, Yates discussed systemic racism, claiming it isn't an issue in
police departments.

“They can't give you specifics, and as I said earlier, (systemic racism) doesn't exist. ...
When you look at something that's systematic, you have to look at the overall compounded
data,” Yates said, referencing U.S. Attorney General William Barr's statements about
racism and policing. “Now, we're not saying there's not individual racist police officers;
that'd be stupid.”

In his Facebook post, Bynum said Yates “does not speak for my administration, for the
Tulsa Police Department, or the City of Tulsa. His comments are under review by the
Chief's Office.

“And if he didn't mean to make the statement in the way it has been received, he owes Tul-
sans a clarification and an apology,” the mayor said.

In a statement posted to Facebook on Wednesday afternoon, the Tulsa Police Department
said the matter had been referred to the Internal Affairs Unit.

‘“‘We appreciate and respect the concerns we are hearing from the community regarding
these comments,” the department said in its statement. “Chief Wendell Franklin and the
Tulsa Police Department want to make it very clear we do not endorse, condone or support
Yates' comments made on the show. ...

“We want to make it clear the statements made by Yates are not a part of any curriculum or
training provided by the Department. Yates' comments do not align with the mission,
values or policies of the Tulsa Police Department.”

The TPD statement notes that Yates is assigned to the Records Division, “which is primar-
ily staffed with civilian employees.”

Yates' statements came when he was not on duty, according to TPD, “and are neither offi-
cial representations of the Department nor of his fellow officers.”

Yates said on Campbell's show that he has received at least two death threats.

“I think that we need to have a healthy debate on that,” Yates said in an interview Wed-
nesday with the Tulsa World. “We have to leave the tension at the door and just have an
honest dialogue.”

In a prepared statement on Yates' Facebook page, he wrote that news coverage of his
statements “does not reflect my hypothetical discussion of statistics based on the research
of others.”

Yates condemned notions that he advocates for more police violence against people of
color.

“This is plainly false and factually inaccurate,” he said in the statement. “And to think that
beyond a discussion of comparative statistics that I would suggest that the ‘police should
actually be shooting' anyone is simply outrageous.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/202006 11 /page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 21. Major condemned

Marg Lewis, a community activist with We the People Oklahoma, called for Yates' resigna-
tion in 2016 after a previous incident and called for it again this week.

“When people listen to Travis Yates, they see a representation of the Tulsa Police Depart-
ment,” Lewis said.

He criticized Yates' statements for emphasizing statistics about people of color in lieu of a
broader look at data and facts.

“He may not be the trigger finger, but he is certainly giving people the power to go out
there and shoot and the mentality that black people are criminals,” Lewis said.

Harper did not call for TPD to take action against Yates during his news conference be-
cause “nothing is going to happen,” adding that the major is protected by the First
Amendment.

Following the conference, community activist Tiffany Crutcher said she believes that Yates
should be forced to resign or at least demoted.

“He's made several comments that are antithetical to the oath that he swears to as a police
officer,” said Crutcher, whose brother Terence Crutcher was killed by a Tulsa police officer
in 2016.

“Personally, in my humble opinion, there's no place for his comments or rhetoric within
one of the most powerful entities in this country, and that's law enforcement,” she said.
“Those comments, all they do is divide when we're trying to bridge that fear, bridge that
mistrust and ultimately better the relationships between the black community and law en-
forcement.”

State Rep. Regina Goodwin, whose House district includes north Tulsa, took it a step fur-
ther, calling for Yates to be fired.

Her animosity toward the major goes back to 2016, when he faced criticism for an editorial
stating that police are “at war.”

Goodwin said she was collaborating with Yates to host an event on community policing
when he made the controversial comment four years ago.

“He's had a history of this publicly,” Goodwin said. “When he said that, I said there's no
way in the world he can come in here and try to have a symposium on community policing
and you think you're at war with us,” she said. “So that comment and all the way up to this
most recent comment he made about how we're probably shooting black folks 20% less
than we should be, he should not be in that position as an officer while I'm paying him as a
taxpayer.”

In an interview with the Tulsa World on Wednesday, Yates said he wrote the 2016 editorial
following the slayings of police officers in Dallas and Baton Rouge, Louisiana. He said the
article was not meant to imply that police are at war with Black Lives Matter protesters.
Yates stressed to the Tulsa World that his statements were made as an individual and that
the Tulsa Police Department should be insulated from them.

Rep. Monroe Nichols, D-tulsa, expressed outrage at Yates' most recent comments during a
Wednesday news conference at the state Capitol to outline his reform proposals. Like oth-
ers, he was most concerned about the 24% claim regarding police shootings of African
Americans.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/202006 11 /page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 21. Major condemned

“T don't believe that any officer who not only feels that way but is bold enough to go ona
radio station and publicly voice those attitudes will ever have the confidence of the public
that is required to be a good law enforcement officer,” Nichols said.

“T certainly have no confidence in his ability to do his job, and hopefully some corrective
action is taken.

“T will also say on that topic, I was proud to see the Tulsa Black Officers Coalition push
back against those comments.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/202006 11 /page/1/textview 4/4
