2020. 6. 21. FOR MORE

FOR MORE

Tulsa World - 2 Jun 2020 - A1 - Kevin Canfield 918-645-5452

More protests, clashes with police near 71st Street and Memorial Drive. Page A5

 

a noncommercial format work

- Working together to ensure better

mental health and well-being for Tulsans

- Arranging a meeting between Bynum

and the family of Terence Crutcher

“T think the biggest thing that came out

of today in my mind is we agreed we want to work together to address issues of longstand-
ing concern in Tulsa,” Bynum said.

“And we all want this to be a better city for

future generations of our community.”

Monday's long discussion made clear that the parties agreed on many general objectives,
“but we had to work through the details to find where our common ground resided,”
Bynum said.

Tiffany Crutcher, whose brother

to

display officers'

Ter

ence Crutcher was shot and killed by a Tulsa police officer in 2016, noted that Monday's
breakthrough came on the 99th anniversary of the 1921 Tulsa Race Massacre.

“TI want to just pause for a moment and honor the lives lost,” she said. “I mean, we are
standing here on the day the smoke cleared, and today the smoke has cleared. ... I really
don't know what to say. Iam quite emotional.”

The decision to move forward with creation of an Office of the Independent Monitor comes
nearly a year after the issue dropped off the radar because neither a majority of city coun-
cilors nor advocates for police oversight could support Bynum's original OIM proposal.
That proposal, among other things, calls for the OIM to audit police Internal Affairs' use-
of-force reviews. Advocates for the program, including Tiffany Crutcher and some city
councilors, wanted Tulsa's OIM to be like Denver's, which grants the OIM greater powers.
Bynum had argued that city ordinances, state law and the collective bargaining process
with the Fraternal Order of Police restricted him from proposing anything that would
change officers' working conditions.

What he had failed to make clear to advocates of the Denver model in those earlier discus-
sions, which became evident Monday, the mayor said, was that his ultimate goal has al-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/20200602/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 21. FOR MORE

ways been to create an OIM just like Denver's.

“So what I committed today to is going through that ordinance process (to create the OIM)
and then, if the council adopts that ordinance and establishes it, then we would go to col-
lective bargaining with the additional responsibilities that would require contractual
agreement,” the mayor said.

Bynum has been a strong supporter of the city's participation in the “Live PD” television
program, but he acknowledged Monday that what he heard in the lengthy meeting helped
him better understand why many people don't.

“T am very proud of the work that our officers do in the field,” he said. “It is not that this
isn't being renewed because I want to hide the work that our officers do, ... but I also rec-
ognize the problematic nature of that transparency being commercialized.

“So what we have agreed upon today is to develop a nonprofit platform that will allow Tul-
sans to still see the great work the men and women in our Police Department do out in the
field, but there won't be a company selling ads to show it on TV.”

The new program is expected to be announced within the next two weeks.

Franklin said he did not have an opinion about “Live PD” but that he does appreciate the
positive impact television shows that use police body camera images can have in conveying
officers' work.

“So if there is another platform, another way that we can let the public have access to that,
then I am for that,” he said.

Franklin addressed the need to make it easier to get rid of officers who violate policies. He
noted that the police officer who is charged with killing George Floyd in Minneapolis, Min-
nesota, sparking nationwide protests, was fired immediately.

“For us in Tulsa, we would suspend that officer with pay,” Franklin said. “And, again, I
would love for us to work on some other avenue, because I think that if that were to happen
here and that we announced that we suspended a person and they were being paid, then it
just continues to fester. That continues to draw undue scrutiny of the Police Department.”
The chief also agreed to work with a small group, including Tiffany Crutcher and other lo-
cal advocates, to discuss policy changes he is considering and to review use-of-force cases.
“Some of the things that I am doing from an Internal Affairs standpoint and the discipline
and the expectations are different for the previous administration,” Franklin said. “So we
are going to talk through some of those.”

Bynum initially had planned to hold a news conference at noon at the Police Courts Build-
ing to discuss the local protests sparked by Floyd's killing and others like it. Several orga-
nizers of those protests, meanwhile, planned to hold a news conference at City Hall at 11
a.m., in part to respond to remarks Bynum had posted on Facebook about some of the
protests.

Rather than engage in what would have been dueling news conferences, the parties agreed
to sit down together and talk. Three hours later, they came out with their plan to work to-
gether to move Tulsa forward.

City Councilor Vanessa Hall-harper said she hasn't felt better in a long time. But the joy,
she said, was tempered by what she believes was the motivation behind Monday's agree-
ment.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/20200602/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 21. FOR MORE

“The sad part about it is that I think the only reason why we've made these
accomplishments and taken these steps is because there is a national revolution taking
place,” she said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/20200602/page/1/textview 3/3
