2020. 6. 21. Events planned to mark slayings

Events planned to mark slayings

Virtual commemoration, service to remember Tulsa Race Massacre on Sun-
day

Tulsa World - 27 May 2020 - A1 - By Kevin Canfield

A virtual commemoration and a special service at Vernon A.M.E Church are among the
events planned for Sunday to mark the two days 99 years ago when one of the nation's
most thriving African American communities was destroyed in the 1921 Race Massacre.
The virtual commemoration begins at 2 p.m. The event is being organized by the Tulsa
Race Massacre Centennial Commission.

Participants will include Race Massacre Commission Chairman and state Sen. Kevin
Matthews; Phil Armstrong, project

and the Animal Wellness Foundation, which led the investigation.

Chris Wilson, First Assistant U.S. Attorney in U.S. Attorney Brian Kuester's office, declined
to comment on the request by the groups, saying the office has not had an opportunity to
review and discuss the allegations.

Edmondson said investigations by Animal Wellness Action and the Animal Wellness Foun-
dation identified three Oklahoma operators, claimed by the groups to be involved in illegal
cockfighting activities.

The three operators were among 71 exporters across the U.S. whose shipping documents
were obtained by the groups from the Guam Department of Agriculture.

Guam shipping records show that three of the top five U.S. exporters of fowl to Guam were
located in the U.S. District for the Eastern District of Oklahoma.

The operators targeted by the AWA and AWF are located in Heavener, Stigler and Tahle-
quah.

The “overarching conclusion” from the review of some 2,500 public shipping records dat-
ing back to November 2016 was that Oklahoma was the No. 1 state in the U.S. in the ship-
ping of fowl to Guam, said Wayne Pacelle, AWA founder.

President Donald Trump in December 2018 signed the Agriculture Improvement Act of
2018, which established a federal ban on all animal fighting in the U.S. territories, effective
last December.

Oklahoma was one of the last states to outlaw cockfighting when voters in 2002 outlawed
the practice.

Public documents examined by the AWA and AWF found that the three operators sent
many shipments amounting to hundreds of birds to Guam that were claimed to be “brood
fowl,” Edmondson said.

But the ratio of roosters to hens in the shipments were 10-to-1 or 100-to-1 in some in-
stances, Edmondson said. Roosters are used in cockfighting.

“That indicates that it is not brood stock at all,” Edmondson said. “It is intended for the
fighting rings of Guam” a violation of state and federal law.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/20200527/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 21. Events planned to mark slayings

Edmondson said the U.S. attorney, should he choose to investigate any violations of federal
law linked to the allegations, would likely use U.S. Postal Service investigators since the
fowl were likely sent via regular mail.

Federal law specifically prohibits the use of USPS to promote, or in any other manner fur-
ther, an animal fighting venture, Edmondson wrote in a letter to Keuster.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/20200527/page/1/textview 2/2
