2020. 6. 21. Trump threatens military force against demonstrators

Trump threatens military force against demonstrators

Tulsa World + 2 Jun 2020: A1

He clears D.C. protesters from area near White House, tells governors they ‘are weak'
WASHINGTON — President

Donald Trump threatened on Monday to deploy the United States military unless states
quickly halted the violent protests that have convulsed cities from coast to coast, speaking
in the White House Rose Garden as tear gas canisters could be heard exploding just a block
away.

Trump said he was recommending that governors deploy

the National Guard in sufficient numbers to “dominate

the streets.” If governors fail to

take action, the president said, he will mobilize “thousands and thousands” of U.S. sol-
diers and “quickly solve the problem for them.”

“We have the greatest country in the world,” the president declared. “We're going to keep
it safe.”

Minutes before Trump began speaking, police and National Guard soldiers began aggres-
sively forcing back hundreds of peaceful protesters who had gathered in Lafayette Park,
across the street from the White House, where they were chanting against police brutality
and the Minneapolis death of George Floyd.

Floyd died last week after he was pinned to the pavement by a police officer who put his
knee on the handcuffed black man's neck until he stopped breathing.

His death set off protests that spread from Minneapolis across America. His brother Ter-
rence pleaded with protesters on Monday to remain peaceful.

The demonstrators in Lafayette Park were cleared so that after his brief statement, Trump
could walk across the park to St. John's Episcopal Church, known as “The Church of the
Presidents,” which suffered fire damage in one of the protests. Holding a Bible, he then
stood with several of his Cabinet members as the cameras clicked.

The moment was quickly decried by Trump's critics, with New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo
saying the president “used the military to push out a peaceful protest so he could have a
photo op at a church.”

“It's all just a reality TV show for this president,” he said on Twitter. “Shameful.”

The country has been beset by angry demonstrations for the past week in some of the most
widespread racial unrest in the U.S. since the 1960s. Spurred largely by Floyd's death, pro-
testers have taken to the streets to decry the killings of black people by police. The protests
come at a time when the country is already buckling because of the coronavirus outbreak
and the Depression-level unemployment it has caused.

On Monday, police fired tear gas at hundreds of protesters who spilled onto an interstate
highway in the heart of Philadelphia just before a 6 p.m. curfew took effect.

While most of the demonstrations have been peaceful, others have descended into vio-
lence, leaving neighborhoods in shambles, stores ransacked, windows broken and cars

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/20200602/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 21. Trump threatens military force against demonstrators

burned, despite curfews around the country and the deployment of thousands of National
Guard members in at least 15 states.

Earlier Monday, Trump told the nation's governors in a video conference that they they
“look like fools” for not deploying even more National Guard troops. “Most of you are
weak,” he said.

He added: “You've got to arrest people, you have to track people, you have to put them in
jail for 10 years and you'll never see this stuff again.”

Washington Gov. Jay Inslee, a Democrat, dismissed Trump's comments as the “rantings of
an insecure man trying to look strong after building his entire political career on racism.”
Former Vice President Joe Biden, the Democratic presidential candidate, vowed to address
institutional racism in his first 100 days in office. He met in person with black leaders in
Delaware and also held a virtual meeting with big-city mayors.

Biden said hate emerges “when you have somebody in power who breathes oxygen into the
hate.”

In Minneapolis, Floyd's brother Terrence made an emotional plea for peace at the site
where Floyd was arrested.

“Let's switch it up, y'all. Let's switch it up. Do this peacefully, please,” Terrence Floyd
said.

The crowd chanted, “What's his name? George Floyd!” and “One down, three to go!” in
reference to the four officers involved in Floyd's arrest. Officer Derek Chauvin has been
charged with murder, but protesters are demanding that his colleagues be prosecuted, too.
All were fired.

The gathering was part rally and part impromptu eulogy as Floyd urged people to stop the
violence and use their power at the ballot box.

Authorities in many cities have blamed the violence on outside agitators, though have pro-
vided little evidence to back that up.

But on Monday, federal authorities arrested a 28-year-old Illinois man, Matthew Lee Ru-
pert, saying he had posted self-recorded video on his Facebook page last week that showed
him in Minneapolis handing out explosive devices and encouraging people to throw them
at law enforcement officers. The video also showed him attempting to light a business on
fire, and looting, according to an FBI affidivit.

At least 4,400 people nationwide have been arrested over the past week for such offenses
as stealing, blocking highways and breaking curfew, according to a count by The Associ-
ated Press.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/20200602/page/1/textview 2/2
