2020. 6. 21. Tulsa County COVID-19 cases surge

Tulsa County COVID-19 cases surge

Tulsa County reports 64 new cases, highest infection rate since pandemic
began

Tulsa World + 12 Jun 2020 - A1 - FROM STAFF REPORTS

Tulsa County is experiencing its highest rate of transmission of COVID-19 since the pan-

demic began, according to data released Thursday.
BG ary fa"

. mI EF
Heo mics brn =an
cones am Saye
Ee a “Hr
elie eases oor @ 4
(006 (aT) _

shinnant beat alice boon fhe:

The last three days, June 7-9, have seen the highest new case numbers — 65, 47 and 64
new cases, respectively.

Daily new case counts before June 7 had never been higher than 45.

Tulsa County's four-day average number of new cases has risen to 46, far above previous
averages. Before this week, the highest four-day average was 31, on April 3-4. Hospitaliza-
tions and death statistics tend to lag behind new case counts.

“There does not appear to be any singular incident or isolated outbreak to point to for the
increase in cases that have been reported out this week,” Tulsa Health Department
spokeswoman Leanne Stephens said.

The daily data reporting for COVID-19 tends to represent a snapshot of the past several
days to two weeks. Stephens said the case investigations and contact tracing are still ongo-
ing and could not point to a single incident or incidents to explain increased transmission.
In previous months, individuals had much fewer contacts with people outside of their
homes, easing contact tracing efforts, Stephens said.

“Right now, an individual who tests positive may have come into contact with a far greater
number of people,” Stephens said.

Americans and Oklahomans have passed significant milestones in recent weeks of the
pandemic, including the loosening of government restrictions and large crowds gathering
for protests.

Since late May, there have been mass protests nationally and locally in response to the
killings of unarmed black individuals by law enforcement. Oklahoma State football player
Amen Ogbongbemiga shared on social media in early June that he tested positive for
COVID-19 and noted that he attended a Tulsa demonstration protesting against police
brutality toward black citizens.

Additionally, Phase 3 of Gov. Kevin Stitt's plan for opening up the state began June 1. The
plan was designed to roll back COVID-19 restrictions aimed at preventing the spread of the
disease.

Under Phase 3, businesses are free to resume unrestricted staffing at worksites by observ-
ing proper Cdc-recommended social distancing protocols. Increased cleaning and disin-
fecting practices are urged.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/202006 12/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 21. Tulsa County COVID-19 cases surge

As of Thursday, two

COVID-19 CONFIRMED CASES, DEATHS

The novel coronavirus COVID-19 has been declared a pandemic by the World Health Orga-
nization. Below are the number of confirmed cases as of 10:30 p.m. yesterday.

TULSA COUNTY

Confirmed cases: 1,372 Deaths: 62

STATE OF OKLAHOMA

Confirmed cases: 7,626 Deaths: 357 more Oklahomans died from COVID-19 and dozens
more have been confirmed to be infected, according to Oklahoma State Department of
Health data.

State health officials report that a Tulsa County woman, who was older than 65, and a Mc-
curtain County woman, who was in the 50-64 age group, died from the disease in early
June.

So far, 357 people have died from the disease.

State health officials also report 146 new, confirmed cases of the disease. There have been
a total of 7,626 confirmed cases in the state since early March. There are 153 people hospi-
talized because of the disease statewide.

Stephens, and health officials at-large, continue to stress personal preventive measures.
They are the “few tools we have” to fight this pandemic while vaccines and treatments
continue to be researched

UNITED STATES

Confirmed cases: 2,023,385 Deaths: 113,818 WORLDWIDE

Confirmed cases: 7,502,278 Deaths: 421,032 and developed, she said.

Prevention of COVID-19'S spread remains the overall goal to reduce strain on hospitals
and save lives. Prevention methods include social distancing, home isolation, face cover-
ings and enhanced hygiene.

Public health officials started recommending in early April that people wear cloth face
coverings to help prevent the spread of the novel coronavirus. The recommendation is not
to prevent the wearer from contracting the virus but to help prevent the wearer from un-
knowingly spreading it.

COVID-19 has an incubation period of two days to two weeks, during which time a person
may be contagious but not have symptoms.

Social distancing means staying out of group or congregate settings, avoiding mass gath-
erings and maintaining a distance of at least 6 feet from others.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/202006 12/page/1/textview 2/2
