2020. 6. 21. Former Bixby, OU star taken in MLB draft.

Former Bixby, OU star taken in MLB draft.
Former Sooner, Bixby star Cade Cavalli taken with 22nd pick of MLB draft

Tulsa World + 11 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Eric Bailey

Nothing delights a parent more than watching their child's dream come true.

) mt
J 4 %
=

  

Pegi ma hie TARO R Rove: hes) to B |
MLE draft. SPORTS // B1

When Bixby's Cade Cavalli was growing up, he wrote a series of notes projecting his
baseball journey. His map ended with a destination that was achieved in the 2020 MLB
draft.

“We've got several (workbooks and notes) that we've found over the past few years,” his
father, Brian Cavalli, said. “You could tell his imagination has long been geared for the
things he's been able to do in the game — to play in college, get drafted out of high school
and very specifically this 2020 draft.

“It's actually called out on some of his old scratch papers and little diagrams, and they all
lead to a certain pick in the MLB 2020 draft.”

On Wednesday night, the Oklahoma right-handed pitcher was selected by the Washington
Nationals with the 22nd overall pick in the first round.

Each draft slot is assigned a value by Major League Baseball. The slot value for the No. 22
pick is $6.6 million. Cavalli was the eighth pitcher selected in the first round.

“I'm extremely excited for Cade and his family. What makes him special is not only his
athletic ability, but his intangibles as a leader and as a person,” OU coach Skip Johnson
said. “The development he has made over the course of three years has been tremendous.
You're talking about a kid who came in as a two-way guy. He played more first base than
he pitched in his first year, and last year he hit as well as pitched every Friday.

“It's been a blessing to watch his growth as we went through this process. It shows how
much he's developed at OU, and the impact he's had on our program. I'm really excited to
watch him continue at the next level.”

Cavalli's notes included specific encouragement, which included phrases like “practice
with intent” and

“outwork everyone.” The final one read “trust in God's plan for your life.”

On Wednesday, the Cavalli family was together to watch the life-changing event. The news
left his parents Brian and Becky ecstatic. Also celebrating was his brother Tristian, his sis-
ter Meagan Booker and her husband, Jamie.

‘When you love somebody like you do your own child and get to see them pursue some-
thing that they love deeply and then get an opportunity to do it for a living, it's very excit-
ing. It could be baseball or anything, for that matter,” Brian Cavalli said.

“He absolutely loves baseball. He's talked about this day for a long, long time.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/202006 11 /page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 21. Former Bixby, OU star taken in MLB draft.

Cade Cavalli started the sport as a 3-year-old alongside older brother Tristian Cavalli play-
ing for the Reds. Brian Cavalli noticed Cade's talents early but was guarded about when
asked to share the timeline for fear of sounding boastful.

“From a very early age, he was a lot of things, in my eyes, one of which was a really good
athlete who was really good at baseball,” Brian Cavalli said. “But that's not all he was or all
he will ever be.”

Cade Cavalli could have turned pro in 2017 after graduating at Bixby, but he declined an of-
fer to play for the Atlanta Braves after being selected in the 29th round of that year's MLB
draft.

There was a lot of discussion as a family during that time, especially after he missed his
senior season at Bixby due to an injury.

They weighed the option of trading experience going to college versus getting his profes-
sional career started. Going to OU outweighed signing a pro contract at the time.

“He prayed a lot and we talked about it a ton,” Brian Cavalli said. “In the end, when the
(2017) draft came around, he was deeply convicted about what it was going to take for him
to say no to college and yes to pro ball.

“He would have been ready to get started (with pro ball), but that's not how it worked out.
I know, for certain, he wouldn't trade this for anything. The beautiful thing about the look
back is you can always connect the dots. He wouldn't trade the three years at OU for any-
thing,” Brian Cavalli said.

Wednesday will always be a special day for the Cavalli family.

“When it's all said and done, he gets to put on a uniform representing a major league team
in acommunity and go chase his dreams of playing in the big leagues,” Brian Cavalli said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/202006 11 /page/1/textview 2/2
