2020. 6. 21. I'm worried about the safety of my nephew

I'm worried about the safety of my nephew

Tulsa World - 30 May 2020 - A1 - Risha Grant Risha Talks

My 12-year old nephew is a great kid. He is funny, loving and kind. He is also ornery and a
prankster.

B ING

ASL

A few of the things that I love most about him are that he still holds my hand in public, he
shares my love of basketball and that he looks just like me. He is my dude.

So, why is my relationship with my nephew worth writing about? Because I worry about
him. At times, I'm afraid for him. He is a black boy who looks older than his age and is
learning to ride his bike.

Let me back up. Recently, I was at my sister's house watching him ride his bike. He is con-
centrating on pedaling but not turning the handlebars, so he keeps riding through the
yards of his neighbors. As we continually yelled at him to turn, the thought crept through
my mind that the mere presence of this black boy riding past the window of his white
neighbor's home could be cause for him to be hurt. My sister's family is one of two black
families in this expensive neighborhood.

Some of you may be thinking that is a far-fetched thought. Except, it's not.

Ahmaud Arbery was out for a run. It would seem unlikely that he would be dead from that
normal everyday activity. Nevertheless, his mom celebrated this Mother's Day without her
son because he was gunned down in broad daylight by white men who decided he looked
suspicious. At one time, a long time ago, I thought it far-fetched also. Now, it is our reality.
By our, I mean black folk.

In Oklahoma City, there was a recent situation where a black delivery driver, Travis Miller,
was blocked from leaving a neighborhood where he had just made a delivery. A white man
who lived there demanded to know why he was there. It was seemingly apparent as Miller
had on a uniform and the work truck had the name of the company painted on the doors.
He was harassed over 30 minutes. At one point, you could see tears streaming down the
man's face. Miller feared for his life and with good reason.

We have hash-tagged young black lives to death (pun intended). #Terencecrutcher #Eric-
garner #Trayvonmartin #Mikebrown #Atatianajefferson #Sandrabland #Ericharris #Ah-
maudarbery #Breonnataylor And now #Georgefloyd. These are just the people I remember
off the top of my head.

Some of you are thinking, here we go again with Black Lives Matter.

About Risha Grant

Risha Grant owns and operates a diversity and inclusion communications and consulting
firm. She is the author of the book “That's BS! How Bias Synapse Disrupts Inclusive Cul-
tures.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/20200530/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 21. I'm worried about the safety of my nephew

Grant, who grew up in Sapulpa and lives in Tulsa, is an international speaker who conducts
training seminars that focus on diversity, inclusion and bias.

Submit your questions

If you have a question about diversity or inclusion you would like to ask Risha Grant, you
can email her at risha@ rishagrant.com. Questions may be addressed in future columns.
Yes, here we go.

On the way home from my sister's house, I told myself that my nephew would be OK and
that I should think positive. Then I got home and watched the video of the killing of Ah-
maud Arbery and it shook me.

I decided to go run my 2.23 miles in his honor. I finished the run and realized that I felt
worse. It seemed so hollow. As I posted about my run on Facebook, I also posted about my
frustration, anger and hurt.

Why didn't I see white people posting about Anmaud Arbery? Where was their outrage over
the death of this innocent black person? Especially my white friends whom I consider
down for the cause. Have we gotten to the point of normalizing the death of black lives?
Some white folk ask what they can or should do. I am so tired of saying this, but we must
create change. At this point, everyone should act as if these people are their own sons and
daughters. You can't wait to stand for injustice until the issue becomes your own personal
loss. There may be no one left to stand for you.

Novelist James Baldwin wrote, “To be a Negro in this country and to be relatively con-
scious is to be in a rage almost all the time.”

Humanity is interconnected. This is not a black issue; it is a human issue. All humans
should be enraged at the continual injustices suffered by black lives.

In the meantime, if you see my nephew riding his bike past your window, please remember
he is just a 12-yearold kid learning to turn his handlebars.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/20200530/page/1/textview 2/2
