2020. 6. 21. State infections peak again More than 200 new cases FOR MORE reported in state, biggest daily spike since early April

State infections peak again More than 200 new cases FOR
MORE reported in state, biggest daily spike since early April

Tulsa World - 13 Jun 2020 - A1 - From STAFF reports

State health officials on Friday reported 222 new cases of COVID-19, marking a new peak

in daily increases for both the state and Tulsa County.
a wgies:

Pe

O0=\re 2 = a LP ao]
ee i oe il e i
1Oag (+92) = — za

Current hospitalinetions/tatal:

The triple-digit spike brought the total confirmed number of infections to 7,848 since
early March.

Nursing home visitation can resume on Monday, governor says. Page A7

The daily report from the Oklahoma State Department of Health provided no information
that might explain the increase.

The last peak of new daily cases for the state was April 4, when 171 new cases were re-
ported.

Health officials reported that 71 of the new confirmed cases oc

curred in Tulsa County, topping the previous high single-day total of 65.

Tulsa Health Department investigations indicate that the latest outbreak is linked to in-
door gatherings where large groups of people congregate for prolonged periods. However,
the investigation continues.

The latest peak occurred as Whirlpool Corp. officials revealed additional cases at their
Tulsa plant; as protesters sustain demonstrations against police brutality; and as people’s
behavior changes during Phase 3 of Gov. Kevin Stitt’s plan to remove Covid-19related re-
strictions.

Tulsa Health Department Director Bruce Dart, in a prepared statement, expressed
concerns about large, prolonged indoor gatherings.

“It is imperative that anyone who chooses to host or attend a gathering take the steps to
stay safe. If you are sick or think you have been exposed to someone with COVID-19, stay
home,” said Dart. “The bottom line is that the more people an infected individual interacts
with and the longer that interaction lasts, the greater the risk for spreading COVID-19 be-
comes.”

When asked about the rise in cases, the governor’s office issued a written statement saying
Oklahoma has “quadrupled our state’s testing capacity over the last month and as a result
have seen an alltime low in our percentage of positive cases at 3.7%.

“We are closely monitoring and deploying resources to communities with recent increases
in COVID-19 cases, and Governor Stitt strongly encourages Oklahomans to take precau-
tions to protect themselves and follow the guidance of contact tracers or health officials to
quarantine or isolate if they are exposed.

“With more than 80 free

COVID-19 CONFIRMED CASES, DEATHS

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/202006 13/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 21. State infections peak again More than 200 new cases FOR MORE reported in state, biggest daily spike since early April

The novel coronavirus COVID-19 has been declared a pandemic by the World Health Orga-
nization. Below are the number of confirmed cases as of 10 p.m. yesterday.

TULSA COUNTY

Confirmed cases: 1,443 Deaths: 62

STATE OF OKLAHOMA

Confirmed cases: 7,848 Deaths: 359 testing locations and a robust hospital surge plan still
in place, Oklahoma is in a strong position to confront this virus until there is a vaccine.”
Concerns remain for greater transmission of the deadly disease in light of President Don-
ald Trump’s plan to rally support for his 2020 election campaign, which is slated for June
19 in Tulsa at the BOK Center.

Tulsa County’s four-day average number of new cases has doubled from its previous peak
in April. The four-day average for new cases reported Friday was

62. The peak before this week was 31 on April 3-4.

Two weeks ago, the county’s four-day average number of new cases was

14.

Tulsa Mayor G.T. Bynum said the increase in cases was expected as the state continued to
reopen.

“As restrictions have been lifted through a phased approach in our state, more and more
people are going back to work and returning to some modified sense of normalcy in the
midst of this pandemic,” Bynum said in a prepared statement.

“The key to maintaining safety is the capacity of our local health care system. I continue to
maintain close communication with the leadership of our hospital systems in Tulsa,” he
said. “While we monitor that capacity, none of us should lose sight of this: COVID-19 is
still here. Wearing masks, washing our hands frequently and practicing social distancing
are all things I’m practicing

UNITED STATES

Confirmed cases: 2,046,643 Deaths: 114,672 WORLDWIDE

Confirmed cases: 7,632,377 Deaths: 425,330 — and I encourage all Tulsans to do the same
to help protect our community.”

Hospitalizations and death statistics tend to lag behind new case counts. As of Friday, state
health officials reported that 154 people were hospitalized due to the disease.

In addition to the peak in COVID-19 cases, state health officials also reported that two
more people have died from the disease.

Both were men older than 65: a man from Muskogee County and a man from Comanche
County, according to health department data.

Prevention of COVID19’S spread remains the overall goal to reduce strain on hospitals and
save lives. Prevention methods include social distancing, home isolation, face coverings
and enhanced hygiene.

Public health officials started recommending in early April that people wear cloth face
coverings to help prevent the disease’s spread. The recommendation is not to prevent the
wearer from contracting the virus but to help prevent the wearer from unknowingly
spreading it.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/202006 13/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 21. State infections peak again More than 200 new cases FOR MORE reported in state, biggest daily spike since early April

COVID-19 has an incubation period of two days to two weeks, during which time a person
may be contagious but not have symptoms.

Social distancing means staying out of group or congregate settings, avoiding mass gath-
erings and maintaining a distance of at least 6 feet from others.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/202006 13/page/1/textview 3/3
