2020. 6. 21. Activists see a victory

Activists see a victory

Tulsa World - 13 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Kendrick Marshall

Just 10 days after Tulsa Mayor G.T. Bynum announced that the city would no longer partic-
ipate in “Live PD,” the network which carried the law enforcement drama decided to cut
ties with the show altogether amid protests against police brutality.

   

A&E announced late Wednesday that it will stop production of the popular cable television
program that followed law enforcement officers at agencies until it determines “a clear
pathway to tell the stories of both the community and police officers” in the wake of public
demonstrations following the death of George Floyd in Minnesota.

The decision by A&E to pull the show is considered a victory for activists and concerned
citizens who believed “Live PD” exploited men and women at their worst moments during
police interactions strictly for entertainment purposes.

Kristi Williams, a longtime Tulsa activist, said the cancellation of the show is an important
step in eradicating the harmful perception that African Americans in particular are associ-
ated with criminality.

“Black people need to stop being seen as suspects,” Williams told the Tulsa World. “Live
PD feeds the narrative that black people are suspects. That needs to change.”

A January collaborative study by Color Of Change and the USC Annenberg

Norman Lear Center’s Media Impact Project purported that television crime shows “dis-
torted representations about Black people, other people of color and women.”

Councilor Lori Decter Wright said the show’s cancellation was “welcome news” for Tul-
sans who had already urged the city to part ways with the program.

Whatever perceived benefits its fans say the show promotes, they are, by far, outweighed
by the divisiveness, bias confirmation and harm it causes in communities where the show
is produced,” Wright said. “There are more productive ways to publicly showcase the daily
work of our police officers without resorting to predatory tactics of crafting a narrative
showcased on an overproduced reality television show.”

Wright said the police department can take advantage of its social media platforms and
other forms of in-house technology to connect and communicate with the public regard
police matters.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/202006 13/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 21. Activists see a victory

The latest season of “Live PD” had featured the Tulsa Police Department, which promi-
nently featured Lt. Sean Larkin as a co-host along with

Dan Abrams. The show previously chronicled the Oklahoma Highway Patrol.

“While the Tulsa Police Department was working with Mayor Bynum and his staff to find
an alternate way to share the behind the scenes work of your Tulsa Police Officers, it ap-
pears as though the program was dropped by A&E,” the police department posted on its
Facebook page.

“For those of you who were fans of the program and enjoyed seeing your officers on it, we
appreciate your support over this last year.”

TPD and Bynum said they will collectively explore alternative options to showcase the
work of city police officers in a noncommercial format in the future.

“I’m incredibly proud of the work of the men and women of the Tulsa Police Department,
and I want Tulsans to be able to see the broad range of what your officers do,” Bynum said
in a recent social media post. “Utilizing a show that sells ads based on the work of our offi-
cers is not necessary to achieve that.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/tulsa-world/202006 13/page/1/textview 2/2
