2020. 6. 17. Warp Speed leaves the blanks unfilled

Warp Speed leaves the blanks unfilled
Little has been revealed in Trump’s vaccine push

USA TODAY US Edition - 26 May 2020: 1A - Elizabeth Weise

Four months into one of the largest medical emergencies in U.S. history, President Donald
Trump announced a goal to develop 300 million doses of COVID-19 vaccine by January,
enough to protect most Americans.

ry

  
  

Charged with the task was Operation Warp Speed, a newly created program to tie together
all major federal, medical and oversight entities, and the military, into one massive coor-
dinated push for a vaccine and treatments.

But how the operation functions, its budget, what power it has and what resources it con-
trols have either not been determined or not been made public, which is a puzzlement to
public health and vaccine policy experts.

The hope is that Operation Warp Speed will provide crucial coordination between govern-
ment entities, create clear lines of responsibility and control, streamline funding and focus
the work, which will speed the timeline.

The fear is that it might politicize scientific and logistical processes under an administra-
tion that has at times been disdainful of science and its experts, potentially slowing work
on a vaccine.

“We just need to ensure that decisions are made thoughtfully and in an apolitical manner
so as to not undermine the existing structures and expertise in place to keep vaccines
safe,” said Lois Privor-Dumm, policy director at the International Vaccine Access Center at
Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health.

The project underscores the president’s penchant for keeping a firm grip on the experts
and bureaucrats coordi

nating his response even as he has battled publicly with Health and Human Services Secre-
tary Alex Azar, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention director Robert Redfield and
others.

Experts agree facilitation is necessary to bring the combined might of the U.S. academic,
medical and pharmaceutical realms to bear on creating a COVID-19 vaccine — the prereq-
uisite for life to return to normal.

That oversight must come from outside the existing agencies, said Dr. Margaret Hamburg,
foreign secretary for the U.S. National Academy of Medicine and the commissioner of the
Food and Drug Administration from 2009 to 2015.

“Any one agency can’t direct sister agencies to do things, can’t knock heads together as
required, can’t rise above to see what the landscape looks like and make sure all the differ-
ent components are being adequately utilized and held accountable,” she said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200526/page/1/textview 115
2020. 6. 17. Warp Speed leaves the blanks unfilled

Many questions, few answers

A week in, the operation made its first announcement — as much as $1.2 billion had been
pledged to accelerate a possible vaccine developed at the University of Oxford in England
and licensed by AstraZeneca. Azar called the contract “a major milestone in Operation
Warp Speed’s work toward a safe, effective, widely available vaccine by 2021.”

Yet few details about the deal are available beyond those in a news release Thursday. The
agreement was with the U.S. Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority
(BARDA), one of the federal programs whose COVID-19 responsibilities now seem to be
under the wing of the operation.

Whether the agreement was coordinated or organized through Warp Speed wasn’t clear.
Emails and calls to Health and Human Services were not answered. Operation Warp Speed
does not appear to have its own media contact.

The White House did not answer questions about reports Trump’s sonin-law and senior
adviser, Jared Kushner, and his top trade and manufacturing adviser, Peter Navarro, are
helping lead the effort. Both have promoted partnerships between government and private
industry to address challenges facing the nation. Neither has had experience with public
health crises.

What is known about the framework and leadership of the program comes from a release
posted on the HHS website on May 15 and a news conference with Trump in the White
House Rose Garden the same day.

There he introduced Warp Speed’s chief adviser, Moncef Slaoui, an expert in molecular bi-
ology and immunology who has spent his career developing vaccines and working in phar-
maceutical companies.

On the logistics side will be four-star Army Gen. Gustave Perna, who will serve as the chief
operating officer. Perna is the commanding general at U.S. Army Materiel Command in
Huntsville, Alabama.

Slaoui and Perna may make a great team because Slaoui understands complex research
ecosystems and Perna knows how to galvanize big operations and deal with logistical con-
cerns, Hamburg said. “I just hope the politicians will get out of the way and let them do
their work,” she said.

One worry is Slaoui’s lack of government experience, said Dr. Andrew Pavia, chief of pedi-
atric infectious diseases at the University of Utah School of Medicine.

Anything that involves all of government has many pieces that need to mesh smoothly.
That’s difficult even for somebody with years of government leadership experience, said
Pavia, who has served on the board of the Infectious Disease Society of America and as a
member of the National Vaccine Advisory Committee.

Because Slaoui comes from industry, Pavia fears he may not have a deep understanding of
how BARDA, the CDC, the FDA, the National Institutes of Health and the Department of
Defense work together.

“He is smart and capable, but there needs to be a clear set of guidelines in government.
That has often not been the case,” he said.

Warp Speed has identified 14 COVID-19 vaccine possibilities. It will select the eight most
promising and provide coordinated government support for their development and testing

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200526/page/1/textview 2/5
2020. 6. 17. Warp Speed leaves the blanks unfilled

in early-stage small clinical trials. Large-scale randomized trials will proceed in three to
five of them.

“Any one agency can’t direct sister agencies to do things, can’t knock heads together as
required, can’t rise above to see what the landscape looks like.” Dr. Margaret Hamburg
Foreign secretary, U.S. National Academy of Medicine

As of late last week, four vaccine coronavirus candidates had received major funding by the
U.S. government. Whether those four represent the semifinalists is not known.

Operation Warp Speed appears to have access to substantial resources. Congress has
directed almost $10 billion through supplemental funding, including the CARES Act. In ad-
dition, more than $6.5 billion was designated for countermeasure development through
BARDA and §$3 billion for NIH research.

How Warp Speed fits into those agencies usual distribution systems isn’t known. Will it
have the ability to designate which contracts are signed or which projects are funded, or
will it merely make suggestions?

The list of institutions involved in the operation includes almost every medical entity
within the federal government, including the FDA, CDC, NIH and BARDA as well as the De-
fense Department, private firms and other federal agencies, including the Department of
Agriculture, the Department of Energy and the Department of Veterans Affairs.

Given the vast number of bureaucratic and organization systems these represent, how “in
charge” Slaoui will be is of concern to some.

His role is officially “chief adviser,” said Dr. Harvey Fineberg, an expert on health policy
and vaccines, current president of the non-profit Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation and
former president of the National Academy of Medicine.

He called the appointment a solid step in the direction of creating a unified command
structure but noted that Slaoui’s scope of authority and range of responsibility are unclear.
“Ts he adviser to the president, to the vice president, to the secretary of Health and Human
Services or to whom? Ulysses Grant was not ‘chief adviser’ to President Lincoln; he was
general-in-chief and commander of the Union Army,” Fineberg said.

Bureaucratic potholes

There is also concern over the ability of the Warp Speed program to avoid bureaucratic
quagmires in the midst of an effort that will require the work of some of the top minds in
science.

“You need to recruit the best and brightest in the field and give them some flexibility to act
on their own initiative. We have to trust them to find the best way to get from A to B and
not micromanage,” said Kendall Hoyt, a professor at the Geisel School of Medicine at
Dartmouth College, where she studies biomedical research and development strategy.

In his speech introducing Operation Warp Speed, Trump likened it to World War II’s Man-
hattan Project, which brought together military, public and private organizations to create
the atomic bomb.

Warp Speed will be run by a mix of scientists, regulators and the military, with the pre-
sumption that only the U.S. military will have the capability to rapidly distribute and de-
ploy a vaccine or vaccines once they are available.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200526/page/1/textview 3/5
2020. 6. 17. Warp Speed leaves the blanks unfilled

When the project was announced last week, the vaccine development portion of the opera-
tion was to be overseen by Dr. Peter Marks, who directs the FDA’s Center for Drug Evalua-
tion and Research. As of Friday he has transitioned out of that role and back to the FDA
after helping set up the initial infrastructure for Operation Warp Speed, the FDA said.

On the Defense Department vaccine side, Dr. Matt Hepburn, project lead for the office for
Chemical, Biological Radiological and Nuclear Defense, will be the subject matter expert.
How the program will interface with the White House Coronavirus Task Force, led by Vice
President Mike Pence, is not entirely clear.

Ideally, Warp Speed will leverage expertise that has gone underutilized during the epi-
demic, some experts say.

What about the CDC?

Historically, the public health face of a crisis of this magnitude would have been the CDC,
but it has largely been sidelined in the coronavirus pandemic. Last weekend Navarro,
director of the Office of Trade and Manufacturing Policy and Trump’s coordinator on the
use of the National Defense Production Act, leveled scathing criticisms at the CDC on NBC
News’ “Meet the Press.” That troubles some observers. “They have thousands of person-
years of expertise, and it seems that they’ve been marginalized,” said Glenn Melnick, a
professor of health economics at the University of Southern California.

The agency that normally would have played a major role in developing a vaccine is HHS’
Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority, created in 2006 under Presi-
dent George W. Bush to find and develop countermeasures to first bioterrorism and later
epidemics and emerging diseases.

It had a political setback when its head of vaccines, Rick Bright, was removed from his po-
sition after he opposed the use of chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine — drugs touted by
Trump and others in the administration — because of serious risks associated with taking
them.

Both the CDC and BARDA are part of the White House Task Force and now Warp Speed, but
they have not played as large a role as they have in previous public health crises such as the
H1N1 influenza, Ebola and Zika.

Also unanswered is how Operation Warp Speed will work with the at least two other large-
scale public/private consortia created in the past three months to focus on a COVID-19
vaccine and treatments.

On April 17 the NIH launched the Accelerating COVID-19 Therapeutic Interventions and
Vaccines public-private partnership. It includes biopharmaceutical companies, the HHS
Office of the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response, the CDC, the FDA and the
European Medicines Agency.

Its stated goal is to coordinate regulatory processes, create a framework for prioritizing
vaccine and drug candidates and streamline clinical trials.

On March 10 the COVID-19 Therapeutics Accelerator was launched by two of the world’s
largest health nonprofits, the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation and England’s Wellcome
Trust together with the Mastercard Impact Fund. The Accelerator, with $125 million in
seed funding, is committed to coordinating research and development efforts for COVID-
19 therapies.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200526/page/1/textview 4/5
2020. 6. 17. Warp Speed leaves the blanks unfilled

A concern over cut corners

Most experts interviewed said they had hope for a vaccine and were pleased a high-level
group was working to cut through red tape and speed the process. The note of caution they
all raised was concern that pressure to have a vaccine ready to use within the president’s
proposed timeline will either cause corners to be cut or lead Americans to worry that cor-
ners had be cut. Either could contribute to distrust of vaccines overall.

“Any misstep risks eroding confidence in vaccines that could have lasting implications,”
said Privor-Dumm at Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health.

In the end, the ability to meet the Trump’s desired deadline will depend on the biology of
the virus as well as how much authority Slaoui is given and how much control he has over
the resources available to him, Fineberg said.

“The first element for success is to establish a unified command structure,” Fineberg said.
“The appointments of Dr. Slaoui and General Perna are a step in this direction.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200526/page/1/textview 5/5
