2020. 6. 17. Trump embraces familiar theme of ‘law and order’ Get-tough approach to policing is reprise of 2016 campaign

Trump embraces familiar theme of ‘law and order’ Get-tough
approach to policing is reprise of 2016 campaign

USA TODAY US Edition - 3 Jun 2020 - 1A - Contributing: Caren Bohan, Christal Hayes and Nicholas Wu

WASHINGTON -— At the Kennedy Space Center over the weekend, President Donald Trump
reflected the crises facing his administration: Acknowledging the “pain” felt by millions of
Americans, he called for healing, not hatred.”

 

Forty-eight hours later, as peaceful protesters were cleared from a park near the White
House, the president stood in the Rose Garden, described himself as “your president of law
and order” and demanded local officials “dominate the streets” — or else.

The increasingly confrontational demonstrations taking place across the USA, observers
said, have given Trump an opportunity to reprise his get-tough approach to law enforce-
ment from the 2016 campaign.

‘We’ re not going to solve our issues of racial inequality or feelings of economic hopeless-
ness brought on by the coronavirus pandemic overnight, but we can stop the riots and
protests with bold, definitive and unapologetic action,” said Jason Miller, who served as a
senior communication adviser to Trump’s 2016 campaign.

John Fritze and David Jackson

The president brandished that message with a high degree of drama and controversy Mon-
day, appearing in the Rose Garden as Secret Service and police swiftly cleared an adjacent
park of protesters, using smoke canisters. Trump then strolled through the park to stand
outside a historic St. John’s Church vandalized the night before.

On Twitter Tuesday, Trump touted what he said was “overwhelming force” and “domina-
tion” of protesters in D.C.

Critics, including some Republicans, described the event as a “photo-op” and a “stunt”
designed to give the president an image of walking through Lafayette Square that was
widely shared by supporters on social media. Though there has been violence and rowdi-
ness in the same park in recent days, reporters observing the events and Washington

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200603/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. Trump embraces familiar theme of ‘law and order’ Get-tough approach to policing is reprise of 2016 campaign

Mayor Muriel Bowser, a Democrat, said the demonstrations were calm for hours leading
up to their abrupt removal.

Sen. Ben Sasse, R-Neb., who occasionally criticizes Trump, slammed the president for
clearing the park and holding up a Bible outside St. John’s Episcopal Church near the White
House.

“There is no right to riot, no right to destroy others’ property and no right to throw rocks
at police,” Sasse said. “But there is a fundamental — a constitutional — right to protest,
and I’m against clearing out a peaceful protest for a photo op that treats the Word of God
as a political prop.”

Trump’s display drew fierce criticism from Democrats, who noted that at the exact mo-
ment the president was describing himself as an “ally” of peaceful protesters, military po-
lice were clearing a park of protesters who were demonstrating without incident.
“Tear-gassing peaceful protesters without provocation just so that the president could
pose for photos outside a church dishonors every value that faith teaches us,” House
Speaker Nancy Pelosi and Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer said in a statement.

The U.S. Park Police said Tuesday it did not use tear gas, only smoke canisters and pepper
balls after people ignored warnings to leave.

Trump’s speech was short on specific action: Many of the governors in states hit by vio-
lence already have activated the National Guard. But the appearance coincided with a push
by the White House to ramp up the “law and order” rhetoric that Trump embraced in his
campaign and his inauguration, when he vowed to end “American carnage.”

In 2016, he repeatedly described himself as “the law-and-order candidate” as the nation
was wrestling with many of the same questions about police use of force and the targeting
of African Americans as it is now.

‘We must maintain law and order at the highest level, or we will cease to have a country,”
Trump said in the summer of 2016 in an address in Virginia.

The president returned to that message in a call with governors Monday, calling them
“weak” and arguing they needed to “dominate” the “radicals” and “anarchists” he said
were behind the violence. Using blunt language, Trump urged the governors to crack down
hard on violent protests.

White House officials said this week that the president was considering invoking an 1807
federal law that would allow him to deploy active-duty U.S. troops to respond to protests in
cities. Known as the Insurrection Act, it was last used in 1992 in response to the Rodney
King riots in Los Angeles.

“Tt’s one of the tools available,” White House press secretary Kayleigh McEnany said.
“Whether the president decides to pursue that, that’s his prerogative.”

Trump did not mention the act Monday.

Though Trump’s core supporters may embrace the more combative approach, outside ob-
servers noted that it carries risk. Federal and state officials traditionally seek to lower the
temperature when unrest breaks out, not raise it. Washington officials reported more than
300 arrests Monday, most of them for curfew violations.

Trump has largely sidestepped the protests’ underlying issues. He said the nation is “sick-
ened and revolted” by the death of George Floyd, an unarmed black man who died in police

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200603/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. Trump embraces familiar theme of ‘law and order’ Get-tough approach to policing is reprise of 2016 campaign

custody in Minneapolis — and he promised justice for Floyd’s family — but he stopped
short of addressing the systemic concerns of racism and disparate use of force that
sparked the anger.

“You have an upset nation,” said James Williams, 49, who attended the demonstration
Monday at Lafayette Square, along with his wife and 14-yearold son. Williams, an engineer
from suburban Virginia — a battleground area in the presidential election — also partici-
pated in Sunday’s protest.

“T came to see how everyone else feels about the injustice that is being done to African
American people,” said Williams, who is black. The country’s law enforcement system is
“not the same for African Americans as it is for white Americans,” he said.

Democratic strategist Jim Manley said he is not convinced that running on a platform of
law and order is necessarily going to help Trump much. “His base will love it, but given his
propensity to overreach, he will just turn off the swing voters in the suburbs,” he said.
Matt Mackowiak, a GOP political consultant, suggested Trump could bind the nation’s
wounds with a formal address, perhaps from the Oval Office. Mackowiak spoke with USA
TODAY before the president’s remarks Monday.

“T believe a national address would be helpful if the president spoke to the intense anger
over the senseless Floyd killing and urged calm and nonviolent protest,” he said. “I believe
the silent majority sympathizes with anger over the Floyd killing while they are also horri-
fied at the rioting and looting.”

Sen. Pat Toomey, R-Pa., said some of Trump’s “tweets have not been helpful.” Sen. Susan
Collins, R-Maine, said the president should highlight “the fact that we need to work on the
underlying racial injustice in this country, but we need to do so in a peaceful manner.”
Administration officials indicated Monday that Trump believes he has spoken sufficiently
on the topic and that his goal would be to take actions to promote security.

Through the highs and lows of his presidency, Trump’s polling has remained consistent —
underscoring a conventional wisdom that most Americans have made up their mind about
him. It’s not clear that Trump could “heal” a highly polarized nation, several observers
said, even if he wanted to.

“This is heartbreaking. The divide in our homes and among our friends is now on the
streets,” veteran GOP consultant Frank Luntz told USA TODAY before Trump’s visit to St.
John’s. “But politically, I understand why he’s remained quiet. The people he needs to ad-
dress don’t want to hear him, and his base is appalled at the looting.”

The unrest, much of it driven by racial tension, has prompted comparisons to 1968, when
Richard Nixon ran for president in part on a “law and order” platform after race riots
prompted by the assassination of Martin Luther King Jr. Matt Dallek, a political historian
at George Washington University who has studied social crises, said the comparison to the
1960s works only to a point.

Americans, he noted, were also angry with President Lyndon Johnson’s handling of Viet-
nam. “I do think there’s an interesting echo in that Lyndon Johnson was in many ways the
author of his own defeat,” Dallek said.

But Johnson had already removed himself from the race in 1968. And Trump, Dallek said,
has already run a campaign focused on law and order.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200603/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. Trump embraces familiar theme of ‘law and order’ Get-tough approach to policing is reprise of 2016 campaign

“What (Trump) really promised was a restoration of order, and what we’ve seen is really
the opposite,” Dallek said.

‘We must maintain law and order at the highest level, or we will cease to have a country.”
President Trump in 2016

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200603/page/1/textview 4/4
