2020. 6. 17. Officers had history of complaints

Officers had history of complaints

Two of the men involved in the arrest had a combined 13 incidents on their
records since December 2012.

USA TODAY US Edition - 29 May 2020 - 1A - Kelley Benham French, Kevin Crowe and Katie Wedell

“Tf I were black, I would probably be dead.”

Kristofer Bergh, who recounted an encounter with police officer Derek Chauvin

When Kristofer Bergh saw the footage of George Floyd’s death, he started to wonder what
might have happened if his skin weren’t white.

He thought back to when he was 17 when two Minneapolis police officers held him at gun-
point over a Nerf gun.

What he didn’t realize until USA TODAY contacted him was that one of those officers was
Derek Chauvin, the officer fired for kneeling on Floyd’s neck.

Chauvin and another of the police officers fired after Floyd’s death this week have histories
of complaints from the public they are sworn to protect.

USA TODAY spoke with Bergh and others who filed official complaints against Chauvin or
officer Tou Thao, who is seen on the video of Floyd’s arrest standing by.

Since December 2012, the officers drew a combined 13 complaints. Minneapolis settled at
least one lawsuit against Thao. Since 2006, Chauvin has been reviewed for three shootings.
They were repeatedly accused of treating victims of crimes with callousness or indiffer-
ence, failing to file a report when a crime was alleged and, in at least one case, using an
unnecessary amount of force in making an arrest.

Attempts to contact leaders of the police union and lawyers for Chauvin and Thao were un-
successful Thursday.

Bergh’s encounter with Chauvin happened in May 2013 as he and some friends participated
in an annual endof-school-year ritual called “Assassins.” It’s a game that involves teams
shooting each other with toy Nerf guns.

As his teammates dropped him off at his home, one of them shot a Nerf dart — made of
brightly colored foam — out the window of the car.

Minutes later, as Bergh exited the vehicle, two police officers confronted him with their
guns drawn.

“They hadn’t used their siren at all, so none of us realized that they were even behind us,”
Bergh said in an email Thursday. The officers shouted commands, including obscenities,
Bergh said, and confiscated all the Nerf guns.

Bergh filed a complaint online with the city. “I was upset that they drew guns on us and
verbally berated us all when they knew we were not a threat,” he said.

An investigator called him, and a few months later, he got a letter saying, “I apologize that
you had a negative interaction with our Officers.”

“T am white, as was everybody in the vehicle,” Bergh, 24, said. “I had been thinking about
this incident in relation to George Floyd’s death before even realizing that it was the same
officer. My initial conclusion was that our white privilege likely saved our lives that day.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200529/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Officers had history of complaints

“If I were black, I would probably be dead,” he wrote on Facebook Thursday.

According to The Associated Press, Chauvin was one of six officers who fired their weapons
in the 2006 death of Wayne Reyes, who police said pointed a sawed-off shotgun at officers
after stabbing two people. Chauvin shot and wounded a man in 2008 in a struggle after
Chauvin and his partner responded to a reported domestic assault.

In 2011, Chauvin was one of several officers put on temporary leave after a police shooting
in a residential community, according to news reports.

From 2013 to 2019, citizens filed roughly 3,000 complaints against police officers with the
city’s Office of Police Conduct Review. Of the complaints the office investigated, more than
98% were closed without any discipline, according to a USA TODAY analysis.

Of Chauvin’s seven complaints since 2012, records indicate he was not disciplined. Five of
Thao’s six complaints were dismissed, and one remains open, a case from 2017 involving
Jenna Nelson.

Officer Thao responded when Nelson called police after an assault. Her injuries weren’t se-
rious, but she wanted to file a report.

Thao dismissed her concerns, she said Thursday.

“He didn’t take me seriously,” said Nelson, 33. “He was super nonchalant about it.” She
said she learned Thao never filed the report.

“T continue to ask myself, was I too professional and too calm?” she said. “Is that why he
didn’t take me seriously? ... Is it because it’s not a big enough deal? It is weird that he
would not care.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200529/page/1/textview 2/2
