2020. 6. 17. Lockdowns drag wineries into the digital realm

Lockdowns drag wineries into the digital realm

With tasting rooms and restaurants closed, age-old traditions go online.

USA TODAY US Edition - 2 Jun 2020: 1A: Jessica Guynn

Susan Tipton began making wine after she and her husband settled on an 18-acre property
in Acampo, California, in 2003. Inspired by a trip to the Southern Rh6ne region of France
where she first tasted Chateauneufdu- Pape wines, Tipton planted rows of Grenache Blanc
in the sandy soil there.

  

Soon, what began as a hobby bloomed into the award-winning Acquiesce Winery produc-
ing 4,000 cases a year. But in March, COVID-19 forced Tipton to shutter her tasting room
in a 100-year-old converted barn and, overnight, about half of her revenue evaporated.
The nation’s $30 billion wine industry stands to lose nearly $6 billion this year, with
smaller wineries getting hit the hardest, according to a report prepared for the Wine Insti-
tute by Jon Moramarco, editor and partner with the Gomberg-Fredrikson Report.

Wineries producing 1,000 to 5,000 cases a year could lose 47.5% of their revenue in 2020
due to tasting room and restaurant closures. Those producing fewer than 1,000 cases could
see a 66% plunge.

Rather than see revenue dry up, many wineries are doing something they’ve resisted for
years: They’re spiriting more of their business into the digital realm, blending internet
savvy with the age-old tradition of winemaking and selling, says e-commerce expert Paul
Mabray, CEO of Emetry.io, a customer insights platform for the wine industry.

“We are the last industry not to be changed by the internet in a meaningful way. Now,
wineries are learning on the fly,” Mabray says.

At Acquiesce, customers, some of whom had never before purchased wine from the winery,
are loading up on bottles and cases online. Last year, e-commerce made up 3% of Tipton’s
sales. So far in 2020? 10%.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200602/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Lockdowns drag wineries into the digital realm

So these days, Acquiesce’s sommelier, who’s usually on hand to make wine and wine pair-
ing suggestions in the tasting room, is leading “Somm Thursdays” on YouTube, while
Tipton is trying her hand at Instagram Live. And a new marketing firm is helping the win-
ery strategically place Facebook and Google ads.

“Any kind of spend that we would normally put into the tasting room with events and wine
club pick-up parties, we are now putting into digital,” Tipton

“Any kind of spend that we would normally put into the tasting room with events and wine
club pick-up parties, we are now putting into digital.” Susan Tipton

says.

Cooped up at home, people are cooking more or they’re meeting up with friends for Zoom
cocktail hours. On Etsy, homeschooling wine glasses are a hit. And with so many of life’s
luxuries indefinitely postponed, even the most casual oenophile is making room in the
budget for a nice vintage or two.

Shopping carts are brimming at wine retailers and on Drizly, Doordash, Instacart and
other mobile apps. Shoppers are also clicking on or tapping their favorite wineries or
they’re discovering new ones. And this could be the status quo for some time, says Rob
McMillan, executive vice president and founder of Silicon Valley Bank’s wine division.
“Restaurants and tasting rooms will be forced to have fewer visitors, even if visitors are
comfortable coming,” McMillan says.

Pandemic-related shift

According to research firm Nielsen, wine sales for the week ending May 9 were up 267%
year over year. With COVID-19 lockdowns, more people are buying that wine online from
the comfort and safety of their homes and having it delivered to their doorstep, says Max
Miller, president of Naked Wines, a major online retailer.

“At Naked Wines, we saw unprecedented growth in demand for the product,” Miller says.
“And we are not really seeing any reversion back to what it was pre-pandemic.”

At Wine.com, revenue has quadrupled to more than $1 million a day since March 28, says
the online retailer’s chief executive Rich Bergsund. April revenue topped $40 million and
Wine.com expects to bring in $100 million this quarter. And the company has hired 500
people and tripled its marketing spend.

Wineries reach out

Some wineries already were prepared for this sudden shift to online buying.

“E-commerce was coming for the wine industry whether the wine industry wanted it to or
not. It just got expedited by COVID-19,” says Justin Noland, who was hired two years ago
to lead digital strategy and e-commerce at Wente Family Estates in California’s Livermore
Valley. He says he was shocked when, at an industry conference, winemakers debated
whether to use Google Analytics on their websites.

“The wineries that were more prepared to pivot to digital have done better in COVID-19,”
he says, “and they are poised to do better after COVID-19.”

At Wente, virtual tastings with Alexa or Google Home let people focus on the wine and each
other, not a screen. The Wente Family stars in “Wine Wednesday” Facebook and Insta-
gram Live episodes. And #MakeTime Bingo reminds people to take time to read a book
(and have a glass of Wente).

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200602/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Lockdowns drag wineries into the digital realm

“You can learn about the winery, the

grapes, the winemaking techniques and the people behind it all,” Noland says. “You can
buy the wine you love or you can explore a huge range of small lot production wine you’!1
never find in a store, and you can do it in pajamas from the comfort and safety of your
home.”

Wente is also going where the demand is. In March, when Pennsylvania closed liquor
stores because of COVID-19, the winery targeted social media ads to the state’s residents,
shipping caseload after caseload.

At Duckhorn Wine Company in St. Helena in California’s Napa Valley, online sales are up
about 250%, says Carol Reber, its chief marketing officer.

The winery is bringing the wine country into people’s homes, with virtual tastings for
groups led by a winemaker. About 10,000 people have tuned in so far to watch Napa Valley
chef Natalie Niksa of La Saison whip up seasonal recipes from chicken enchiladas with
Rancho Gordo beans to maple-glazed bacon meatloaf with sweet potato mash and pair the
dishes with Duckhorn wines.

Online sales help

Baiocchi Wines, which usually sells 80% of its inventory through its tasting room at Sutter
Creek in the Sierra Foothill Wine region of California, had to make quick changes after
COVID-19.

On March 17, when six Bay Area counties locked down, owner and winemaker Greg Baioc-
chi launched a special promotion on Facebook, Instagram and Twitter for a three-pack of
red blends using the #ShelterInPlace hashtag. Then he teamed up with the Sacramento
chapter of Feed the Frontlines, which delivers free meals to health care workers and first
responders, donating 10% of each $100 wine pack of wine he sold to the nonprofit.

‘What we have learned through this is that we should be focusing more attention online,”
Baiocchi says. “I’ve always done it on a regular basis. This has taught me I should be doing
it with more frequency. It just puts you in front of people more often and gives them a rea-
son to purchase your wine.”

Last October, Anaba Wines, a sustainably farmed, wind-powered winery in the Carneros
region of California’s Sonoma Wine Country, put the finishing touches on a hospitality
center designed to draw more visitors.

Right before the shelter-in-place order took effect, general manager John Michael
Sweazey switched all of his winery’s spending from driving foot traffic to e-commerce
sales.

Shipping and other promotions have produced sales from new customers, and so have vir-
tual tastings. On Sundays, he and his wife, an Italian cook, create Instagram stories, pair-
ing wine with homemade bolognese or with focaccia and cured meats and cheeses.

So far, Anaba Wines has topped last year’s sales.

“If we were just an e-commerce business, if we hadn’t built a tasting room at all and we
were starting this from scratch, I would say this could turn into something great,”
Sweazey says.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200602/page/1/textview 3/3
