2020. 6. 17. Truth about rallies

Truth about rallies
About 400 cities hosted 970 demonstrations

USA TODAY US Edition - 11 Jun 2020 - 1A: Contributing: Trevor Hughes and Ryan Miller

New research using data to track protests across America shows 80% have been peaceful,
contrary to the Trump administration’s messaging.

  
 
  
  
 

  
  

Peep Telling, fol
kee O
Ack WiEQNAttOep

p

WASHINGTON - Since President Donald Trump’s election, mass demonstrations have
largely been concentrated in major cities. The Women’s March, for example, has drawn
massive crowds in Washington, D.C., and other metropolitan areas in the past three years.
In 2018, thousands took to the streets to support the special counsel investigation on Rus-
sia.

But the death of George Floyd, a black man whose neck was pinned to the ground under the
knee of a Minneapolis police officer, sparked the most widespread mass demonstrations in
recent memory. Despite the threat of a global pandemic, crowds large and small — from
rural towns, to suburbs, to big coastal cities — gathered to protest racial injustice and po-
lice brutality against African Americans.

The vast majority — 80% — appeared to be peaceful, according to new research that con-
tradicts the emphasis the White House has often put on the instances of looting and riot-
ing.

As of Tuesday, more than 970 protests had taken place in about 400 cities and towns
across the country, according to research conducted by the marketing firm Ipsos and
teams from the Universities of Chicago and Oxford.

“The numbers and the breadth are actually pretty impressive,” said Chris Jackson, senior
vice president at Ipsos. “We’re seeing these protests happening in all 50 states. ... It’s not
just the big cities; it’s towns across the board. And the large majority of these protests have
been peaceful protests.”

Trump, who has described himself as a “law-and-order” president, has been sharply crit-
ical of the protesters and has urged authorities to “dominate” the streets, including in dis-
cussions with governors in which he accused them of being “weak” in their responses.
Using data to track protests

Researchers scraped social media feeds to identify where protests were occurring on a
given day and then crossreferenced them against news reports, satellite imagery and
Google Street View for verification.

Researches also used cellphone aggregate data to find large gatherings of people. Jackson

said gatherings that were not captured on social media weren’t included in their data.
https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/2020061 1/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Truth about rallies

“T don’t think this is necessarily the total of everything that’s happened ....

This is the best picture we can get in this period in time,” Jackson said, adding that the
data will continue to change as protests continue.

A separate analysis by USA TODAY, which relied on local news coverage, found widespread
demonstrations in more than 1,000 places across all 50 states.

‘Tipping point’

Surprisingly, Jackson said, protests were occurring even in solidly or moderately conser-
vative places where police abuse of black people isn’t a typical rallying cry. Nebraska,
Montana, Wyoming and the Dakotas — predominantly white and solidly red states that
don’t normally deal with issues involving racial injustice —- each saw a handful of largely
peaceful demonstrations.

Nebraska may be mostly white, but it has one of the fastest-growing foreign born popula
tions, said Sergio Wals, who teaches at the University of NebraskaLincoln’s political sci-
ence department and its Institute for Ethnic Studies. The local school’s English Language
Learning Program teaches children from families representing about 150 different coun-
tries and 125 different languages.

The protests in Lincoln and other parts of the state may reflect the growing diversity. But
many people were also just moved by the brutality they saw in the video of Floyd being
held down by officers, Wals said.

““Whomever watched those painful eight minutes and 46 seconds, that’s just the trigger,
that’s just the tipping point for a lot of people,” he said.

Also poignant, he added, was a televised scene during the protests in Lincoln when a top
state patrol officer knelt with protesters on the steps of the Capitol for nine minutes.
“That was a very powerful image of a glimpse of change we might about to see,” Wals said.
Protests were widespread in Southern states such as Louisiana, Alabama and Mississippi,
where the issue of race has long been at the forefront. But states such as Virginia and West
Virginia also saw protests far from more liberal, urban centers.

The protests are a reflection of how much has changed in a relatively short time. In 2014,
only about 4 in 10 people saw the deaths of Michael Brown in Ferguson, Missouri, and Eric
Garner in New York as indicative of broader problems in policing. Today, nearly 7 in 10
Americans said Floyd’s death reflects broader issues, according to a Washington PostSchar
School poll.

Protests continue

just be

Protests over Floyd’s death continued as his funeral was held Tuesday. Derek Chauvin, the
white officer who held his knee on Floyd’s neck, is facing a second-degree murder charge.
Three other officers were charged with aiding and abetting.

National media coverage has largely focused on major cities, where peaceful protests were
marred by looting, vandalism, burning cars and thousands of arrests.

In Minneapolis, USA TODAY reporters witnessed small groups, dressed in black, carrying
shields and wearing knee pads, destroy property and threaten journalists who pho-
tographed them.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/2020061 1/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Truth about rallies

In Washington, D.C., tensions rose between the federal and municipal governments over
how to police the protests, as Trump discussed deploying active-duty forces. Thousands —
among the largest crowds seen since protests began in May — took to the streets on Satur-
day.

In New York City, protests were largely peaceful, although hundreds were arrested. A po-
lice officer who was captured on video shoving a woman is facing assault and other
charges. More than 300 miles north, in Buffalo, police officers were suspended and
charged with second-degree assault after a viral video showed them pushing a 75-yearold
man to the ground.

Maureen Groppe and Kristine Phillips

Historical comparison

Terry Madonna, director of the Center for Politics and Public Affairs at Franklin and Mar-
shall College in Pennsylvania, called the protests “the largest we’ve had in modern his-
tory.”

“Right now,” he said, “the dominant aspect of American politics is police and police re-
form.”

Tamara Herold, director of the Crowd Management Research Council at the University of
Nevada, Las Vegas, said the scope is reminiscent of the Civil Rights movement and Viet-
nam War protests in the 1960s and 1970s but it’s difficult to compare. The size, location
and other details of the past events were not documented the way today’s actions are, she
said.

Herold sees some factors not present in past movements that likely contributed to the size
and scope of the recent protests. Because of the pandemic, for example, more people are
unemployed or working from home, making it easier for them to participate.

People are wearing masks. Those who study the dynamics of crowds say a sense of
anonymity encourages more violent or disruptive behavior.

Herold said that could contribute to the fact that about 1 in 5 of the recent protests had ob-
servable violence or damage, according to Ipsos.

“T think this number is a little bit higher than you would anticipate,” Herold said.

Protests in swing states

The top battleground states of Pennsylvania, Michigan, Wisconsin and Florida that will
likely decide the 2020 presidential election saw protests not only in their largest cities but
also in more conservative parts of the states.

“Tf there was a rock-ribbed Republican area in Michigan, it’s West Michigan,” said David
Dulio, director of the Center for Civic Engagement at Oakland University.

But on Sunday, more than 400 people marched in Holland to call for an end to police bru-
tality.

“Silence is violence,” read the sign of one protester, a white woman who joined others in
front of city hall.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/2020061 1/page/1/textview 3/3
