2020. 6. 17. George Floyd's horrific death lights a long-smoldering fuse

George Floyd’s horrific death lights a long-smoldering fuse
Pain of civil unrest has transformative history

USA TODAY US Edition - 1 Jun 2020 - 1A - Rick Jervis

From Portland to Pensacola, violent protests flared in more than 30 cities across the U.S.
this weekend in the wake of the death of George Floyd, an African American man who
pleaded that he could not breathe after a white police officer kneeled on his neck for more
than eight minutes during an arrest.

   

Why did Floyd’s death spark such widespread, visceral outrage, while three other deaths of
African Americans this year — Breonna Taylor in Louisville, Anmaud Arbery in Georgia and
Tony McDade, a transgender man killed by police officers in Tallahassee — did not?

An atray of combustible issues converged to form a “perfect storm” of civil unrest after
Floyd’s death and could lead to longer-lasting changes, experts and protest organizers
said.

For starters, the coronavirus pandemic that has sequestered most Americans to their
homes, forced millions into unemployment and has disproportionately infected African
Americans already had many black Americans and white supporters simmering with rage
and frustration, said Kristen Clarke, president and executive director of the National
Lawyers’ Committee for Civil Rights Under Law.

“The depths of despair are enormous right now for black people in this country,” she said.
“You pile on unchecked police violence and it makes for a perfect storm.”

Throughout the weekend and across the country, police cars and government buildings
burned, the National Guard was deployed into major U.S. cities, and some cities instituted
curfews. In one Midwest city, a person was killed and at least two more shot.

In Atlanta, protesters stormed the CNN Center while its mayor pleaded for calm, and in
Washington, the White House went on lockdown after protesters massed outside. Protests
also flared in Louisville, Philadelphia, Detroit, Austin, Charlottesville, Va., and Columbus,
Ohio.

More than 1,400 people were arrested in 16 cities since Thursday. More than 500 of those
happening in Los Angeles on Friday, the Associated Press reported.

Fired Minneapolis police officer Derek Chauvinwas arrested Friday on charges of third-de-
gree murder and manslaughter after Floyd’s death. A bystander’s video caught more than
eight minutes of Chauvin’s knee pinning Floyd’s neck as the suspect lay on the ground and
pleaded for help before eventually passing out.

That video, which went viral, is another key reason his death has sparked so much outrage,
said Keneshia Grant, a Howard University political scientist. The moments leading to Ar-
https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200601/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. George Floyd's horrific death lights a long-smoldering fuse

bery’s death also were captured on video, but the footage of Floyd’s final moments — with
the victim repeatedly saying he couldn’t breathe and asking for his mother while irate by-
standers pleaded with police to stop — caused a much deeper emotional wound in those
who watched it, she said.

Also, President Donald Trump’s response may have driven more protesters to the streets,
Grant said. Trump in a tweet on Friday called the violent protesters “THUGS,” adding that
he was ready to send in the military if things got out of control and “when the looting
starts, the shooting starts.”

“America does not have a leader to bring people together,” Grant said. “We didn’t get a
tweet that told everyone to Kumbaya and hold hands. We got a tweet about looting and
shooting.”

The large-scale rallies that spread through nearly every major city in America over the
weekend resemble the mass protests that materialized during the 1960s civil rights move-
ment led by the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr., said Jill Savitt, executive director of the Na-
tional Center for Civil and Human Rights in Atlanta.

Those incidents and the protests that followed led to significant policy shifts, she said. The
murders of James Chaney, Andrew Goodman and Michael Schwerner, three civil rights ac-
tivists, in 1964 helped push the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, she said. And the
1965 Selma to Montgomery marches, which dissolved into bloody confrontations with lo-
cal law enforcement, helped propel the signing of the Voting Rights Act of 1965, Savitt said.
Similar policy and systemic changes could result from today’s protests, she said.

“You hate that you need tragedies like this for change, but history tells us that’s what hap-
pens,” Savitt said. “We’re having a societal shake of the lapels.”

Silas Lee, a sociologist at Xavier University of Louisiana, said he has also been impressed
by the large number of white and brown protesters taking part in the rallies. Large-scale
civil right protests don’t effect change unless widely supported by America’s diverse popu-
lations, he said.

“This is not just an African American issue,” he said. “It’s a white issue, it’s a brown issue,
it’s a human issue.”

Grant, the Howard University political scientist, said the protests won’t work without
widespread multicultural support. “White people have to figure out why they’re afraid of
black people,” she said, “why they’re not appalled by these killings.”

She added: “Black people have been trying to do something for 400 years: Assert their hu-
manity. And it hasn’t worked.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200601/page/1/textview 2/2
