2020. 6. 17. Space station welcomes astronauts aboard

Space station welcomes astronauts aboard

In another milestone and ahead of schedule, SpaceX capsule carrying
NASA’s two-man crew docks safely with the orbiting outpost.

USA TODAY US Edition - 1 Jun 2020: 1A: Emre Kelly Florida Today USA TODAY NETWORK

BREVARD COUNTY, Fla. — Safely and ahead of schedule, astronauts Bob Behnken and Doug
Hurley docked with the International Space Station on Sunday, a crucial milestone in

  
   

aed
Their 27-foot Crew Dragon capsule, launched from Kennedy Space Center at 3:22 p.m. EDT
Saturday, made contact with the orbiting outpost at 10:16 a.m. — a timeline just shy of the
predicted 19hour trek. Docking was completed 14 minutes later with “hard capture,” or an
airtight seal between the ISS and Crew Dragon.

“It’s been a real honor to be a small part of this nine-year endeavor since a United States
spaceship has docked with the International Space Station,” mission commander Hurley
said. “This is an incredible time to be at NASA. Three new vehicles to be flown, continuing
missions to low-Earth orbit, and then to the moon and Mars.”

Astronaut Chris Cassidy, already on board the ISS after launching on a Russian Soyuz
spacecraft, welcomed the veteran astronauts by ringing a bell in the station’s Unity mod-
ule. The Navy tradition is used to welcome the arrival of new crew members.

“Crew of Expedition 63 is honored to welcome Dragon and the Commercial Crew Program
aboard the International Space Station,” Cassidy said. “Bob and Doug, glad to have you as
part of the crew. Well done.”

For Hurley, the docking is familiar. In 2011, he was on the final space shuttle mission’s
rendezvous with the ISS, during which his team left behind an American flag to be re-
trieved by the next group of astronauts launched from U.S. soil.

Now, nearly 10 years later, he’ll capture the flag he left behind.

The docking marks something of a halfway point for SpaceX. After a oneto-four-month
stay on the station,

Behnken and Hurley will reenter the capsule for departure and a splashdown in the At-
lantic Ocean.

If successful, it will pave the way for SpaceX to continue flying astronauts for NASA and
other agencies.

It has even secured interest from civilians like actor Tom Cruise for flights to low-Earth
orbit.

Saturday’s liftoff from Pad 39A on a Falcon 9 rocket returned the U.S. to crewed space-
flight, which ended in July 2011 with the final flight of the space shuttle. Under multibil-
lion-dollar contracts doled out by NASA, SpaceX and Boeing were selected in 2014 to build
new commercial spacecraft and return astronauts to the station.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200601/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Space station welcomes astronauts aboard

With its docking, Crew Dragon became the fifth vehicle now attached to the ISS. Also there
are two Russian Progress cargo craft, a Russian Soyuz capsule and a Japanese HTV-9 cargo
vehicle.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200601/page/1/textview 2/2
