2020. 6. 17. Americans’ opinions of police drop significantly

Americans’ opinions of police drop significantly

Violent clashes have left US shaken, survey says

USA TODAY US Edition - 8 Jun 2020 - 1A - Rebecca Morin

WASHINGTON — The perception of police by white Americans has dropped by double digits
in just one week, as police continue to target peaceful protesters, bystanders and journal-
ists amid nationwide demonstrations focusing on systemic racism facing black Americans.
Perceptions also have declined across all racial groups following the death of George Floyd
in police custody, according to a new survey from the Democracy Fund + UCLA Nation-
scape Project.

The findings are important not only for the future of police forces but also for President
Donald

Trump, who in a Rose

Garden speech on Monday declared himself

“the law and order president.” In that address, which was preceded by the forceful re-
moval of peaceful protesters from an area near the White House,

Trump aligned himself with law enforcement forces and against demonstrators he de-
scribed as violent and even terrorist.

Among white Americans — a group where

Trump saw broad support in the 2016 election

— those who have a very favorable or somewhat favorable impression of police officers
dropped to 61%, in the survey conducted May 28 to June 3. That’s down from 72% the pre-
vious week, according to an analysis of Nationscape Insights, a project of the Democracy
Fund, UCLA and USA TODAY.

In addition, the percentage of white Americans who hold a somewhat or very unfavorable
view of police rose to 31% from 18%.

Perceptions of police have declined among all racial groups, according to the survey of
more than 6,000 Americans, which has a margin of error of plus or minus 2.2 percentage
points:

1 Among black Americans, only 38% find the police very or somewhat favorable. That
number dropped 9 percentage points from the May 21-27 survey. The percentage of black
Americans who find police somewhat or very unfavorable also increased by 10 percentage
points to 54%.

I About half (51%) of Asian and Pacific Islanders find police very or somewhat favorable,
down 14 percentage points. Those who find police somewhat or very unfavorable also in-
creased to 44% from 18%.

I Latinos saw the least change in favorable perceptions of police. Fifty-two percent of Lati-
nos find police very or somewhat favorable, a 6 percentage point drop from the previous
week. There was an 11 percentage point increase among Latinos who find police very or
somewhat unfavorable, 36% from 25%.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200608/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Americans’ opinions of police drop significantly

These changes were striking,” said Robert Griffin, research director for the Democracy
Fund Voter Study Group. “While public attitudes are typically quite stable, the country is
experiencing an almost unprecedented level of civil protest — hundreds of gatherings and
events taking place even in small cities. At a time when so much in American politics feels
deadlocked, this is the kind of major event that can reshape how Americans think.”

The Democracy Fund + UCLA Nationscape Project is a large-scale study of the American
electorate. Throughout the 2020 election cycle, the researchers aim to conduct 500,000
interviews about policies and the presidential candidates.

Saturday marked the ninth day of demonstrations across the country — in every state, in
cities large and small — following the death of George Floyd in police custody and in-
creased reports and videos of police using excessive force on protesters and other citizens.
Meanwhile, the Trump administration is facing questions over the surge in military forces
patrolling Washington, D.C., and his urging of governors, whom he called “weak,” to crack
down on violence in their states.

The protests began after the death of

“These changes were striking . ... At a time when so much in American politics feels dead-
locked, this is the kind of major event that can reshape how Americans think.” Robert
Griffin Research director for the Democracy Fund Voter Study Group

Floyd, a black man who was captured on video lying face down while a white Minneapolis
police officer pressed his knee into his neck. The officer, Derek Chauvin, is facing a sec-
ond-degree murder charge. Officers J. Alexander Kueng, Thomas Lane and Tou Thao have
been charged with one count each of aiding and abetting second-degree murder and aiding
and abetting seconddegree manslaughter.

There have been instances of rioting and looting amid the protests. There also have been
instances of police using force on peaceful protesters.

The Associated Press reports that more than 10,000 arrests have been made nationwide,
many for low-level offenses such as curfew violations and hundreds for looting or bur-
glary.

Two Buffalo police officers, suspended amid an outcry over a video showing them shoving
a 75-year-old man to the ground during a protest, were charged Saturday with second-
degree assault.

This past Monday, law enforcement officers used tear gas to clear peaceful protesters near
Lafayette Square, a park in front of the White House, allowing Trump to pose with a Bible
at nearby St. John’s Episcopal Church.

In Atlanta, authorities pulled two young black college students from a car and shot them
with stun guns while they were stuck in traffic caused by protests over Floyd’s death. Six
Atlanta police officers have since been charged.

At a Floyd protest in Austin, Texas, a 20-year-old protester was shot in the head by local
police with nonlethal beanbag ammunition, fracturing the protester’s skull and leaving
him with brain damage.

In Salt Lake City, officers knocked over an elderly man with a cane.

Journalists across the nation covering the protests also have been shoved, fired at with
rubber bullets, tear gassed at close range and arrested.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200608/page/1/textview 2/2
