2020. 6. 17. It's time to let the Lance Armstrong story go

It’s time to let the Lance Armstrong story go

We don’t need another documentary about a proven liar who has not
changed, Christine Brennan writes.

USA TODAY US Edition - 26 May 2020 - 1A - Brent Schrotenboer

The stepfather of Lance Armstrong says he drove his famous stepson “like an animal,’””’
using corporal punishment and the disciplinary style of a taskmaster to shape his future
personality, for better or worse.

  

a

Terry Armstrong made these statements during Part 1 of the new ESPN film “LANCE,”
which aired Sunday and delved into the upbringing of the disgraced cyclist in Texas before
his rise to world fame as a seven-time winner of the Tour de France.

“Lance would not be the champion he is today without me, because I drove him,” Terry
Armstrong said. “I drove him like an animal. That’s the only thing I feel bad about. Did I
make him too much ‘win at all costs’?”

Lance Armstrong had a different take on it, saying his stepfather “just beat the (expletive)
out of me.”

Such formative details in Part 1 sets the stage for Part 2, which airs next Sunday and fo-
cuses largely on the unraveling of his empire of dishonesty. The two-part film is helping
ESPN fill the sports void during the COVID-19 pandemic after debuting at the Sundance
Film Festival in January.

Here are a few takeaways from Part 1:

Stepfather issues

The film lets viewers draw their own conclusions about whether Armstrong’s troubled
childhood influenced how he mistreated others as an adult. His mother gave birth to him
when she was 17 and said she was in an “abusive relationship” with his biological father.
After he left the picture, she married Terry Armstrong, who said he adopted Lance when he
was about 3.

Lance said Terry was “kind of terrible” and would punish him for leaving his drawer open.
“Sure enough, I would leave a drawer open, and he would pull out his fraternity paddle and
just beat the (expletive) out of me,” Lance said.

Terry Armstrong acknowledged he was tough on Lance about cleaning his room. He said
Lance’s mother was “always there” and explained that his parenting style was influenced
by his military

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200526/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. It's time to let the Lance Armstrong story go

school background. “It was bend over and take your licks,” he said of punishing Lance.

“T was a taskmaster, but I didn’t put my arms around him enough and tell him I loved
him,” Terry said. “I was always there, always coaching him, always pushing him. But I
didn’t show him the love that I should have.”

The opening scene

Lance Armstrong opens the first twoplus minutes of the film with a profanity-laced story
about how a group of strangers confronted him near a bar, showed him their middle fin-
gers and told him “(expletive) you!” over and over again. This was in more recent years
and happened after Armstrong had been exposed as a bully and cheater who lied for years
about using illicit drugs and blood transfusions to gain an edge on his bike.

Instead of fighting back, Armstrong said he turned the other cheek. He said he gave the bar
his credit card number to pay for their drinks on one condition: that the bar tell these in-
stigators that he was paying for their drinks and that he “sends his love.”

Such a tale raises questions without

more information: Did that really happen and where?

Armstrong has told this story before, but his history invites skepticism. He didn’t return a
message seeking comment. Director Marina Zenovich told USA TODAY it took place in
Denver.

“T actually went to the bar and filmed at the bar, and ended up not using it,” she said. “I
filmed with the bartender who was working that night.”

Gunderson is now Armstrong

How important is Armstrong’s last name to his brand? The name Armstrong evokes im-
ages of muscle and power — a strong arm. It also evokes an American hero, Neil Arm-
strong, the first man to walk on the moon.

But that’s not Lance’s birth name. His biological father was Eddie Gunderson, who died in
2012. Stepfather Terry Armstrong gave Lance his last name, though Lance said he consid-
ered changing it after his mother divorced him when Lance was about 15. He said it was too
late by then.

“T was already establishing myself and my career and brand or whatever that means,” he
said. “I like the name Lance Armstrong. I think that’s a good name. It’s better than Lance
Gunderson. That’s kind of a weird name.”

Competing illegally at 15?

As a teenager, Armstrong said he used a forged birth certificate to circumvent minimum
age requirements for entering triathlons. “You had to be 16, so we’d forge my birth certifi-
cate,” he said.

He described the process like this: “Forge the certificate, compete illegally and beat every-
body.”

In retrospect, this seems entirely in character for Armstrong. At the same time, it was sort
of like cheating in reverse. He was breaking rules, much like he did later in his life with il-
licit doping methods in the Tour de France. But he wasn’t exactly gaining an advantage
from it. He was competing against older athletes.

“T understand the reason for the certain age requirements because there’s a lot of liabili-
ties,” his mother Linda said in the film. “They were going to swim in a lake, and this and

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200526/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. It's time to let the Lance Armstrong story go

that, but it meant so much to him.”

Early bullying

Zenovich spoke with a wide range of sources for the film, including Armstrong’s family
and friends. She documented his fight against cancer, when he lost his hair and underwent
brain surgery.

She also tracked down his old triathlon coach Rick Crawford, who said he saw bully issues
in Armstrong’s character “from day one” as a teenager. He said he chaperoned Armstrong
during a trip to Bermuda for a triathlon and rented him a scooter to get around.

In return, Crawford said Armstrong abused the scooter, didn’t return it when he should
have and disregarded his concerns about it. In effect, Crawford said Armstrong seemed to
be sending him the message that “I can beat you” and “there’s nothing more you can do
for me.”

He said he told Armstrong’s mother that “he’s mouthy and disrespectful.”

He said she replied that he didn’t have any authority over him.

“That stung,” Crawford said. “That stung a lot.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200526/page/1/textview 3/3
