2020. 6. 17. Pentagon chief splits with Trump on use of troops

Pentagon chief splits with Trump on use of troops
President threatened to deploy military to states

USA TODAY US Edition - 4 Jun 2020 - 1A - Contributing: Michael Collins, David Jackson, USA TODAY; The Associated
Press

Defense Secretary Mark Esper said Wednesday that he opposes using the U.S. military to
quiet domestic unrest in a break with President Donald Trump, who threatened this week
to deploy federal troops to “dominate the streets.”

  

“T say this not only as secretary of defense, but also as a former soldier, and a former
member of the National Guard: The option to use active-duty forces in a law enforcement
role should only be used as a matter of last resort and only in the most urgent and dire of
situations. We are not in one of those situations now,” Esper said.

“T do not support invoking the Insurrection Act.”

Asked whether Trump had lost confidence in Esper, press secretary Kayleigh

McEnany said, “As of right now, Secretary Esper is still Secretary Esper.” Trump will let
the public know if he loses faith in Esper, she said.

The Insurrection Act is an 1807 law that allows the president to send in the military or fed-
eralize the National Guard in states that are unable to put down an insurrection or are de-
fying federal law. The act has been invoked in the past to confront the Ku Klux Klan during
Reconstruction and to enforce desegregation in the South. President George H.W. Bush
used it in 1992 to help California’s governor respond to riots in Los Angeles.

Protests have roiled cities across the USA after the death of George Floyd, an African
American man who suffocated

William Cummings “I do not support invoking the Insurrection Act.”

Defense Secretary Mark Esper

last week after a Minneapolis police officer pinned him to the ground.

Trump bemoaned governors’ “weak” response to the unrest and said Monday in the Rose
Garden that he would deploy federal forces where local authorities were not able to stop
violent protests.

“If a city or state refuses to take the actions that are necessary to defend the life and prop-
erty of their residents, then I will deploy the United States military and quickly solve the
problem for them,” Trump said.

Though Trump has the legal authority to invoke the Insurrection Act, many, like Esper,
cautioned against the use of troops to quiet domestic unrest.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200604/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Pentagon chief splits with Trump on use of troops

“No levelheaded governor is asking for an even more militarized response to civilian
protests against police brutality and systemic racism — for good reason,” said Hina
Shamsi, director of the National Security Project at the American Civil Liberties Union.
Michéle Flournoy, who served as undersecretary of defense for policy during President
Barack Obama’s administration, said, “Previous presidents have understood the extreme
sensitivity of using the U.S. military against American citizens or in confronting American
citizens.”

Esper said the National Guard is best suited for domestic situations in support of law en-
forcement.

Trump and Esper have differed sharply and publicly in the past.

Esper said in January that he had not seen specific evidence that Iran planned an imminent
attack on U.S. facilities, an assertion Trump made in part to justify a lethal drone strike on
top Iranian general Qasem Soleimani in Baghdad. Esper contradicted the president’s threat
to target Iranian cultural sites, saying the United States would “follow the laws of armed
conflict.”

Esper said last year that he urged Trump not to intervene in the cases of three military
members who were accused or convicted of war crimes.

This week, Esper told NBC he was unaware of the president’s plan Monday to visit St.
John’s Church, a historic site near the White House that had been vandalized by protesters.
Trump’s visit to the church drew bipartisan criticism after police cleared a park of peaceful
protesters that stood between the White House and the church. Esper revised his account,
saying he didn’t know what would happen when they arrived.

Esper said Wednesday that he knew the president planned to take him and other adminis-
tration officials to St. John’s Episcopal, but he did not know that the president planned to
pose with a Bible there or that the protesters were driven out.

“T did know that we were going to church. I was not aware that a photo-op was happen-
ing,” Esper said.

He said he believed the group was going to review the damage demonstrators had caused
the day before in Lafayette Square and at St. John’s.

“What I was not aware of was exactly where we were going, when we arrived at the church
and what the plans were once we got there,” Esper said. He said he wanted to clarify re-
marks he made to NBC News.

Esper said he and Mark Milley, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, thought they would be
able to thank members of the National Guard for their service during the walk, but “the
path we took to and from the church didn’t afford us that opportunity.”

Asked whether he knew National Park Police would use “strong measures” to drive out
peaceful protesters, Esper said he was “not aware of what they were doing.”

“T was not aware of law enforcement plans for the park. I was not briefed on them, nor
should I expect to be,” Esper said. “But they had to take what actions I assume they felt
was necessary, given what they faced.”

Esper said he was on his way to the White House when the area was cleared of protesters.
“That was not a military decision. It was not a military action. The National Guard was
there in support of law enforcement,” he said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200604/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Pentagon chief splits with Trump on use of troops

Esper and Milley were sharply criticized for their participation in the event. James Miller, a
member of the Pentagon’s Defense Science Board, resigned in response to the incident,
telling Esper he violated his oath to defend the Constitution.

“You may not have been able to stop President Trump from directing this appalling use of
force, but you could have chosen to oppose it. Instead, you visibly supported it,” James
wrote in his resignation letter.

Esper addressed some of the criticisms the Pentagon has faced during Wednesday’s news
conference.

Esper said National Guard members did not fire rubber bullets or tear gas into the crowd,
though he did not address whether other security forces may have. He said the guardsmen
wore helmets and body armor for their protection, “not to serve as some form of intimida-
tion.”

He confirmed a National Guard medevac helicopter “hovered low” over the protesters and
said he directed Secretary of the Army Ryan McCarthy to conduct an inquiry into what
happened.

“T want to make sure I understand why,” he said, “who was involved and what orders they
were given or not given.” Esper contested the idea that the hovering helicopter was used to
intimidate protesters but said flying that low in a city “looks unsafe to me.”

“There’s a lot of questions that need to be answered,” he said.

Esper acknowledged that he advised Minnesota Gov. Tim Walz that the best way to stop
violent protests was “by dominating the battle space.” Esper said it was a commonly used
phrase from the “military lexicon” to “describe a bounded area of operations.”

“It’s not a phrase focused on people, and certainly not on our fellow Americans,” Esper
said. “In retrospect, I would use different wording, so as not to distract from the more im-
portant matters at hand or allow some to suggest that we’re militarizing the issue.”

The defense secretary said the military is “sworn to defend” the First Amendment right to
free assembly, and “we encourage Americans at all times to exercise them peacefully.”

He said Floyd’s death was a “murder” and a “horrible crime,” but he had refrained from
commenting on it sooner because he wanted to stay out of the political fray.

“My aim is to keep the department out of politics, to stay apolitical,” he said.

“For well over two centuries, the United States military has earned the respect of the
American people by being there to protect and serve all Americans,” he said. “We will saf...
guard the hard-earned trust and confidence of the public as our nation’s most respected
institution.”

“If a city or state refuses to take the actions that are necessary to defend the life and prop-
erty of their residents, then I will deploy the United States military and quickly solve the
problem for them.” President Trump on Tuesday

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200604/page/1/textview 3/3
