2020. 6. 17. For this black journalist, it’s like screaming into a void

For this black journalist, it’s like screaming into a void

USA TODAY US Edition - 28 May 2020 - 1A - Eileen Rivers

The images are shocking, even for those of us who have been steeped for years in coverage

of police brutality.
5 ee

a

     
   

     
 
    

A giliee A ogee 3
or
|

ca | f
USWCE ron ,

TAP V1 cree!
George Floyd, 46, was handcuffed and pinned down by Minneapolis cops. One officer
pressed his knee into Floyd’s neck for several minutes as three others stood by. Floyd said
he couldn’t breathe. Then he died.

Shocking, but for black people in America, sadly, not surprising.

Weeks before, the name of a different young black man became a household one for similar
reasons. Video was released of Ahmaud Arbery, 25, jogging through what appeared to bea
picturesque Georgia community. He was confronted by two white men — Travis McMichael
and his father, ex-cop GregMost

ory McMichael — and gunned down.

Add Floyd’s and Arbery’s names to the growing list of blacks in America whose deaths have
prompted nationwide activism and hashtags: Sandra Bland. Philando Castile. Eric Garner.
As a black journalist in America, I often feel like my coverage of these incidents amounts to
screaming into the void. The history of police brutality is deeply entrenched in an accep-
tance that makes it almost too daunting to end.

And as a black journalist in America, I’m tired of being shocked by images of brutality.
Each one bruises my psyche and hurls me into a mini-depression. It makes me wonder
whether my work is making a difference.

It makes me fear for my brother who lives in Colorado and can, at times, be a bit of a hot-
head. It also makes me fear for my brother in California, whose temper is a bit more laid
back. It takes a lot to really get him angry. I fear for him because I know that it doesn’t take
a black man being angry to get killed by a cop. It just takes a black man being black.

I grew up hearing about police raids during the 1950s on black communities that ended in
the brutalization and arrests of random black men after reports (which might or might not
have been true) that a white woman was raped by a vaguely described “black man.” And I
heard about cases where police didn’t commit crimes themselves but simply looked the
other way when African Americans were brutalized.

Today, the invisible has become visible. Cops are caught on cellphone and body cameras.
Social media and mainstream news coverage make footage go viral, prompting protests.
But the cases of brutalization persist.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200528/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. For this black journalist, it’s like screaming into a void

How can that be? For one thing, it’s rare for an officer to be convicted, even with camera
footage. Nine hundred to 1,000 people in America are fatally shot by police each year. Yet
from 2005 to March 2019, according to NBC News, only 35 officers were found guilty in an
on-duty shooting that resulted in death, an average of about three a year.

In the Arbery case, it took more than two months for video footage to be released. And only
after protests during a pandemic did authorities arrest and charge the McMichaels.

In that case, former cop Gregory

McMichael had, according to reports, exhibited behaviors associated with officers who go
rogue. He’d blown off use-of-force training multiple times. He’d been reprimanded at
least once in his career.

If catching rogue cops on camera isn’t enough, what is?

Ultimately, it comes down to this: Police departments must be willing to do the hard work
of addressing and resolving the biases that cause officers to devalue black life. Racism
dates to our nation’s founding, and biases exist within all of us. In cops, those biases can
be deadly.

Curbing the power of police unions is also hard work. Unions far too often protect bad
cops, including African American ones, and solidify the blue wall that pushes good cops to
stay silent about misconduct.

I hope someday to be surprised by a change that would cause unions to rethink how they
address brutality and deal with cops when they are being disciplined or fired; surprised by
a federal government that would create nationwide use-of-force standards and punish-
ments that would protect my brothers; surprised by courses that teach officers to lead with
compassion instead of military-style force.

At least there was swift action in the Floyd case. He was killed on Monday. The officers
were fired on Tuesday.

That gives me faith that progress is possible.

In the interim, I will keep screaming.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200528/page/1/textview 2/2
