2020. 6. 17. Most Americans don't blink at wearing a mask

Most Americans don’t blink at wearing a mask
Despite some disagreements on distancing, 84% say they have covered up.

USA TODAY US Edition - 26 May 2020 - 1A

Rebecca Morin

Se =

    

WASHINGTON — Despite high-profile incidents of Americans refusing to wear face masks,
an overwhelming majority of Americans say they have worn a face covering during the
coronavirus pandemic, according to a new survey.

More than four out of five Americans — 84% — say they have worn a mask in public in an
effort to limit the spread of coronavirus, according to a survey from the Democracy Fund +
UCLA Nationscape Project.

Although reopening economies and wearing a mask have become partisan talking points,
the majority of Democrats and Republicans say they have worn a mask in public.

The Democracy Fund + UCLA Nationscape Project is a large-scale study of the American
electorate. Throughout the 2020 election cycle, the researchers aim to conduct 500,000
interviews about policies and the presidential candidates. This survey of 4,576 Americans
was conducted May 7 to 14. There is a margin of error of plus or minus 2.6 percentage
points.

Eighty-nine percent of Democrats and 81% of Republicans say they have worn a mask in
public, according to the survey. There is a small disparity among age groups: Younger peo-
ple are slightly less likely to have worn a mask in public. Roughly three out of four (78%)
Americans ages 18 to 29 say they’ve worn a face mask in public, and 90% of Americans 65
and older say they have.

Robert Griffin, research director for the Democracy Fund Voter Study Group, said that
although there’s a narrative of “some sort of cultural war” about wearing masks, the data
does not show that.

“The idea that there is a sizable portion of the population who’s somehow violently op-
posed to this behavior that public health officials are advising just doesn’t seem to line
up,” he said.

Over the past several weeks, there have been several reports and viral videos of people re-
fusing to wear face masks in public areas, such as stores and restaurants.

This month, security guard Calvin Munerlyn was fatally shot after turning away a cus-
tomer for trying to enter a Family Dollar in Michigan without a mask. A woman in Alabama
was taken down by a police officer after an altercation with a Walmart employee who asked

her to wear a mask. Most recently, a video of a verbal altercation between a Costco cus-
https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200526/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Most Americans don't blink at wearing a mask

tomer and employee in Colorado went viral after the customer was asked to leave the store
because he was

not wearing a mask.

President Donald Trump has also declined to wear a mask in public. The Centers for Dis-
ease Control and Prevention recommends “wearing cloth face coverings in public settings
where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain (e.g., grocery stores and
pharmacies) especially in areas of significant community-based transmission.”

Although there are some differences along demographic lines, the majorities of all groups
have worn a mask in public, according to an analysis from Nationscape Insights, a project
of Democracy Fund, UCLA and USA TODAY.

There is a gap among people who have worn masks when it comes to what activities they
are willing to participate in if restrictions were lifted.

The biggest gap is between people who would and would not attend a professional sporting
event. Among people who say they would attend a sporting event if restrictions were lifted,
75% say they had worn a mask in public.

Among those who say they would not attend a professional sporting event, 92% say they
have worn a mask in public.

The next largest gap comes between those who would go to a stadium concert and those
who wouldn’t.

Of those who say they would go to a stadium concert, 76% say they’ve worn a face mask in
public. Among those who say they would not go to a stadium concert, 91% say they’ve
worn a face mask in public.

Griffin said there is a clear relationship where the people most likely to wear a mask “are
also the folks who are going, ‘Hey, I’m going to be more cautious about this even if things
do reopen, and I’m not certain I’ll actually engage in them at all.’ ”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200526/page/1/textview 2/2
