2020. 6. 17. Washington transformed

Washington transformed
Anti-police sentiment likely won’t fade from DC

USA TODAY US Edition - 10 Jun 2020 - 1A - ALEX BRANDON/AP

Clashes have ended, but symbols of the fight for justice remain.

pu

yeaa

 

WASHINGTON -— The National Guard troops in their military fatigues and riot gear are
leaving town.

The black chain-link fence surrounding Lafayette Park is coming down. And the anger and
rage in the streets that fueled 12 days of protests against police brutality has started to ebb,
even if the determination to effect change has not.

But even as some semblance of normalcy returns to Washington, the protests sparked by
the death of George Floyd — a Minneapolis black man killed while in police custody — have
left their mark on the nation’s capital.

A section of the street near where President Donald Trump staged a much-criticized photo
op has been renamed “Black Lives Matter Plaza,” a public recognition of the racial injus-
tice that caused protesters to take to the streets. Nearby, a make-shift shrine to Floyd has
blossomed, covering part of the expanded security fence encircling the White House.

The fence is “a really powerful symbol of how our president is isolating himself and dis-
connecting himself from the people he’s supposed to be governing,” said A.J. Williamson,
a student at Georgetown University.

Elsewhere, anti-police graffiti remains scrawled on the side of the Treasury Department
and other buildings and statues across town. Plywood still covers the windows and doors
of many shops and restaurants after owners boarded them up to prevent vandalism and
looting. Restaurants that had opened up to outside dining — after being shuttered for
weeks because of the coronavirus pandemic — have retreated again, waiting for the
protests to end.

“It’s hard to look at these buildings all boarded up,” said Macee Johnson, 24, a property
manager who lives in Washington. “They’re so beautiful. But people need to make sure
their stuff is safe.”

In the days after the protests turned violent, downtown Washington began to resemble an
armed camp, with a phalanx of federal law enforcement officers and military personnel
lining the

Michael Collins, Sarah Elbeshbishi and David Jackson Trump threatened to deploy the mil-
itary to enforce order but never followed through.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/2020061 0/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Washington transformed

streets. Some 5,000 National Guard troops poured into the District, deploying along with
officers from the FBI, the Drug Enforcement Administration, the Bureau of Prisons and
other agencies.

Green Humvees blocked and redirected traffic at intersections. Low-flying military heli-
copters hovered over the protesters.

Trump threatened to deploy the military to enforce order but never followed through, after
some Pentagon officials raised concerns. He announced Sunday he had ordered the Na-
tional Guard to start returning home, stating on Twitter that tensions had cooled and that
“everything is under perfect control.”

Washington’s iconic monuments and memorials appear to have emerged from the
protests unscathed and unscarred. The Washington Monument was open to the public
Monday with no visible signs of damage and just a 3-foot gate surrounding it.

And one of the most eye-catching illustrations of how the protests transformed Washing-
ton can be found in big, yellow block letters on a section of the busy street leading to the
White House.

“Black Lives Matter,” screams a new mural painted on the pavement in letters so large
that they are clearly visible on aerial photos found on Google maps.

Washington Mayor Muriel Bowser directed city crews to paint the twoblock-long street
mural as a show of solidarity with the thousands of protesters who turned out day after day
demanding an end to police brutality. Bowser, a Democrat, also renamed a 1,000-foot sec-
tion of the street in front of the White House “Black Lives Matter Plaza” — an act of defi-
ance against Trump, who had

slammed the protesters and demanded that city leaders “dominate” the streets.

Leaders of the Black Lives Matter movement, who accused Bowser of paying lip service to
their cause, later affixed their own message to the citysanctioned mural. Activists armed
with buckets of yellow paint added an equal sign and additional letters so that the mural
now reads: “Black Lives Matter = Defund the Police.”

Protesters have also co-opted another new prominent — and much criticized — addition to
downtown: The towering black fence that surrounds the area around the White House.
From H Street, down 15th Street, across Constitution Avenue and back up 17th Street, the
newly installed security fence stretches for more than 1.5 miles and further expands the
sealedoff area between the White House and the rest of the city.

The fence was installed after police used smoke bombs, pepper pellets and officers on
horseback to move peaceful protesters out of Lafayette Park so that Trump could walk
from the White House to St. John’s Church, which had sustained minor damage after it was
set fire during the protests. Trump stood in front of the boarded-up church and held up a
Bible, a photo op that was denounced by Bishop Mariann Edgar Budde of the Episcopal
Diocese of Washington and many others.

Protesters have since turned the section of the fence along H Street into an art gallery and
a shrine to Floyd, decorating it with posters, banners and photos. “I Can’t Breathe,” reads
one of the signs, echoing Floyd’s words to the police officer who pinned him to the ground
with a knee to his neck. “Police Reform Now,” demands another. One message seems di-
rected at Trump: “Tyrant, We Will Vote You Out.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/2020061 0/page/1/textview 2/2
