2020. 6. 17. ‘Why can't | just be black in the state of Minnesota?’

‘Why can’t I just be black in the state of Minnesota?’

USA TODAY US Edition - 28 May 2020 - 1A - Tyler Davis and Ryan W. Miller

MINNEAPOLIS — Bernard Miles has lived in the Powderhorn neighborhood for 30 years

and at age 50 said he still fears harassment and aggression from the Police Department.
iS iia l La

        

“If Ihad my knee on somebody’s neck, I’d already be in prison,” he said.

He was referring to the incident Monday, when Officer Derek Chauvin knelt on George
Floyd’s neck as the 46year-old black man gasped for air and said he couldn’t breathe.
Video of the encounter showed Floyd’s last moments and prompted the firing of Chauvin,
who is white, and three other officers amid a national outcry.

In the neighborhood where Floyd was killed and in Minneapolis at large, residents and
community leaders say a mistrust between police and the black community persists.

“You cannot talk to any African American young person, especially male, who will not have
a story about their interactions with police,” said Pastor Hans Lee of Calvary Lutheran
Church, a block south of the intersection where Floyd died.

History of police killings

In nearby Falcon Heights, Minnesota, Philando Castile was fatally shot by a police officer
while being pulled over during a traffic stop in 2016. A jury acquitted St. Anthony, Min-
nesota, police officer Jeronimo Yanez in Castile’s killing.

The year before, the fatal shooting of Jamar Clark, 24, by Minneapolis officers responding
to a paramedic call led to a protest occupying the area around the department’s 4th
Precinct. After the officers were cleared of wrongdoing, Bob Kroll, head of the city’s police
union, called Black Lives Matter a “terrorist organization,” according to the Star Tribune.
Kroll was also at the center of controversy in 2019 when a department policy banned off-
duty officers from wearing their uniforms to political events. The change was made before
a rally for President Donald Trump, and Kroll responded by selling red “Cops for Trump”
shirts before appearing at the event.

In 2010, David Smith, who had bipolar disorder, was held down and restrained by Min-
neapolis police officers before he died of asphyxiation. Smith was face-down, groaning on
the floor of a YMCA as an officer drove his knee into his back and another was on his legs,
the Star Tribune reported. The officers involved were cleared of wrongdoing, but the city
paid a $3 million settlement to Smith’s family.

In 2002, Christopher Burns was killed when two officers used an authorized chokehold on
the 44-year-old, the Star Tribune reported.
https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200528/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. ‘Why can't | just be black in the state of Minnesota?’

“T’ve never known the city of Minneapolis not to have issue with police brutality or over-
aggressive policing,” said John Thompson, who was friends with Castile and became a
prominent activist in the area after his death. “Why do I have to feel this way? Why can’t I
just be black in the state of Minnesota?”

Though Thompson said steps were taken toward meaningful reform in the department
under the leadership of Police Chief Medaria Arradondo, Floyd’s killing could set that
progress back.

A ‘vibrant’ black community

Wednesday, more than 50 people milled outside Cup Foods at the intersection of 38th
Street and Chicago Avenue, the site of Floyd’s arrest. Some held signs, others made
speeches.

Carmen Means, executive director of the Central Area Neighborhood Development Organi-
zation, said the intersection is not “foreign to tragedy.” A young woman was shot there in
April.

“Minneapolis historically has been home to a small but vibrant African American popula-
tion. From the 1930s to the 1970s, an African American neighborhood flourished” in the
area surrounding the intersection, according to the Minnesota Historical Society.

Means said a highway built west of where Floyd was killed divided the neighborhood, and
many faced the issue of redlining, the discriminatory denial of services, especially bank
loans, to communities of color.

The historical society said the neighborhood changed from the 1980s to 2000s, facing
higher crime and the crack epidemic. In 1982, Central High School, Prince‘s alma mater,
closed.

“We don’t have a trust for the police in this neighborhood. Period,” Means said, adding
that her community is not an isolated one but part of a larger mistrust many in the black
community feel toward police throughout the city and the entire USA.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200528/page/1/textview 2/2
