2020. 6. 17. Was it tear gas?

Was it tear gas?

USA TODAY US Edition - 4 Jun 2020: 1A

What happened at Lafayette Square?

Effects of tear gas on the body ——— bi

  

It ceca bo Rear
6. OF PEpner soray

¥ fh. ugg ing
and d@fculty
cpaaking

 

heath effects:

 

AUG SR EAT Se a ei

Adrianna Rodriguez and Janet Loehrke

As crowds gather across the country to protest the death of George Floyd, authorities meet
them with tear gas and pepper spray in attempt to prevent more violence.

While some protests have ended peacefully, others in cities including Pittsburgh, Min-
neapolis and St. Louis have been confronted with a line of police in riot gear firing tear gas
and projectiles into crowds protesting the death of Floyd, an unarmed black man who died
in police custody in Minneapolis.

If people are planning to join one of these protests, here’s what they need to know to pro-
tect themselves against tear gas and pepper spray.

What is pepper spray?

Pepper spray is a lachrymatory agent, which means it stimulates the eyes to produce tears.
The main active ingredient in pepper spray is an oil known as oleoresin capsicum, the
same agent that provides “heat” in chili peppers, according to Dr. Robert Glatter, an emer-
gency physician in New York City.

Pepper spray is typically dispersed into the air as an aerosol or as small particles in a liquid
spray, according to the National Capital Poison Center. Pepper sprays and mists can travel
8 to 12 feet, said Sabre, a popular brand of pepper spray. Gel sprays can travel 20% farther.
The chemical irritant can cause a feeling of “bubbling” or “boiling” in your eyes, tempo-
rary blindness and eye pain. The effects can last 30 to 45 minutes. Glatter said symptoms
also may include burning in the throat, wheezing, dry cough, gagging and difficulty speak-
ing.

People who inhale pepper spray may develop a sudden elevation of blood pressure, which
can lead to a stroke or heart attack, he said. Those with asthma also may be at higher risk
for complications.

Skin exposure can cause pain, redness, swelling and itching, according to the National
Capital Poison Center.

Dr. Kelly Johnson-Arbor, medical director at National Capital Poison Center, said that even
though pepper spray is technically a natural agent, it can still cause great harm, especially
to those with underlying conditions. “Some people interpret natural as safe, and that’s
definitely not true,” she said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200604/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Was it tear gas?

How to treat pepper spray

Glatter said the most important thing people should remember is to not rub their eyes if
they get sprayed because it will spread the compound deeper into the eye.

Immediately blinking allows tears to help flush away some of the oils contained in the
pepper spray. He recommended using baby shampoo or diluted dishwashing soap with wa-
ter.

While many people are seen on television pouring milk on their face after being pepper-
sprayed, Glatter said that only helps reduce the burning sensation but doesn’t remove any
of the oil.

Johnson-Arbor said there is no scientific evidence to prove baby shampoo works against
pepper spray.

What is tear gas?

Tear gas isn’t technically a “gas,” Glatter said. It’s a powder that is heated and mixed with
a liquid or solvent and released from canisters as an aerosol.

There are different types of tear gas. The two commonly used by police are 2-chloroben-
zalmalononitrile (CS) and chloroacetophenone (CN).

Glatter said tear gas should be considered a nerve agent in that it doesn’t just irritate cells,
but it also activates specific pain receptors leading to intense and burning pain on all af-
fected areas. It can cause pain and burning in the eyes, mucous membranes, throat, lungs
and skin. Tear gas also causes exaggerated muscle cramping in the eye and sensitivity to
light that leads to eye closure, Glatter said.

Tear gas can affect every part of the body. People can experience burning in the nose and
nasal mucosal swelling. Other effects include difficulty swallowing, drooling and severe
burning inside the mouth and on the tongue.

People with asthma or chronic inflammatory lung disease (COPD) are most at risk for se-
vere complications as a result of tear gas. Glatter said tear gas can cause an asthma attack
or swelling in the upper airway that could lead to asphyxiation and even death.

Actual burns and blisters could form as a result. Ingestion of tear gas through the mouth
can also lead to nausea, vomiting and diarrhea.

“You get it — not a pretty picture,” Glatter said.

Johnson-Arbor strongly urges people not to pick up tear gas canisters. She has seen re-
ports of protesters throwing them back at authorities, a practice that can be dangerous.
How to treat tear gas

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends immediately leaving the area
and getting to fresh air quickly if exposed to tear gas or similar riot control agents.

If the tear gas was released outdoors, the agency advises seeking the highest ground possi-
ble as the dense vapor cloud travels close to the ground. If exposed indoors, people should
leave the building as soon as possible.

The CDC says people should quickly take off any clothing that may have tear gas on it. If
clothing needs to be pulled over the head, such as a shirt or sweater, Glatter said it must be
cut off to limit exposure to the eyes or mouth.

People should place clothes in a plastic bag and wash any tear gas from skin as quickly as
possible with soap and water. They should not use soap for the eyes. For burning eyes or

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200604/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Was it tear gas?

blurred vision, the CDC recommends rising eyes with plain water for 10 to 15 minutes.
Glatter said contact lenses should be removed with clean gloves and glasses should be
washed with soap and water. Glasses can be used again, but the CDC advises against
reusing the contacts.

Long-term effects, complications

Experts say low level agents such as pepper spray and tear gas don’t usually result in per-
manent or long-lasting health effects, but exposure to higher concentrations can be more
harmful.

Glatter said damage to the corneal epithelium, the outermost layer of the cornea, could
lead to visual impairment. Other complications include laryngospasm, a spasm of the vocal
cords, or pulmonary edema, fluid in the lungs, in people with a history of lung disease.
Johnson-Arbor urged protesters to be prepared. They should dress in long sleeves and
pants so the agents can’t come in contact with skin. They should not wear contact lenses,
because tear gas or pepper spray particles can get stuck between the eye and lens. She sug-
gested protesters wear some protective gear such as goggles.

Lastly, she advised people to arm themselves with enough water to thoroughly irrigate
their eyes if exposed to pepper spray or tear gas.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200604/page/1/textview 3/3
