2020. 6. 17. Never again

Never again

As the world watches, mourners at George Floyd’s funeral demand action
so his untimely death won’t be in vain

USA TODAY US Edition - 10 Jun 2020 - 1A - RICARDO B. BRAZZIELL/USA TODAY NETWORK Contributing: Chuck Lin-
dell, Austin American-Statesman; Rick Jervis, USA TODAY

HOUSTON - Relatives and elected leaders spoke passionately at Tuesday’s funeral for Ge-
orge Floyd, demanding reforms and justice for a black man whose death has shaken the
world.

 

About 500 friends, family, politicians and entertainers streamed into The Fountain of
Praise church in Houston for what co-pastor Mia Wright called, “a home-going celebra-
tion of brother George Floyd’s life.”

The emotional service, which rang with gospel music and calls to ensure that Floyd did not
die in vain, was widely broadcast and streamed online.

“T want justice for my brother, for my big brother, that’s Big Floyd,” Rodney Floyd said.
“Everyone is going to remember him around the world. He’s going to change the world.”
Those words were echoed throughout the service in remarks by several of the invited
guests, a list that included Houston Mayor Sylvester Turner, Rep. Sheila Jackson Lee and
Rep. Al Green.

Former Vice President Joe Biden, the presumptive Democratic nominee for the presidency,
met Floyd’s family privately Monday and referenced Floyd’s 6-year-old daughter Gianna
in a video presentation.

“Now is the time for racial justice,” Biden said. “That’s the answer we must give to our
children when they ask, ‘Why?’ Because when there’s justice for George Floyd, we will
truly be

Jorge L. Ortiz, John Bacon and John C. Moritz

on our way to racial justice in America. And then, as you said Gianna, your daddy will have
changed the world.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/2020061 0/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Never again

Later, Lee said, “I don’t know if I’ll ever be able to overcome the words, ‘I can’t breathe.’ ...
“But what I will say is the assignment of George Floyd and the purpose for me is there will
be no more 8 minutes and 46 seconds of police brutality.”

Floyd’s death after a Minneapolis police officer kneeled on his neck for almost nine min-
utes was caught on a video that triggered outrage and waves of protests — and could ulti-
mately result in sweeping changes in the nation’s justice system.

Green was among those underscoring the importance of achieving the meaningful reforms
that failed to materialize after black men like Michael Brown, Eric Garner and Freddie Gray
died at the hands of police in previous years.

“We have a responsibility to each one of them to make sure that we do not walk away today
after having celebrated his life and not taken the next step to ... assure the future genera-
tions that this won’t happen again,” Green said.

Besides the prominent politicians, Floyd’s brothers and niece addressed an audience
mostly outfitted with masks — some of them bearing Floyd’s resemblance — to avoid
spread of the coronavirus. Early in the service, gospel singer Dray Tate performed his sin-
gle “A change is gonna come” as an artist drew a painting of Floyd’s face on a large black
canvas.

Two other drawings of Floyd, depicted with a halo over his head and angel wings at his
back, were also prominently displayed at the stage.

In delivering the eulogy, activist Al Sharpton stressed that Floyd’s death “was not just a
tragedy, it was a crime,” and he warned that, “until the law is upheld and people know
they will go to jail, they’re going to keep doing it because they’re protected by wickedness
Former Vice President Joe Biden recounted in a video during Tuesday’s service how George
Floyd’s daughter, Gianna, asked him why he had to die. “You’re so brave,” Biden said. “No
child should have to ask questions that too many black children have asked for genera-
tions: Why? Why is daddy gone? In looking through your eyes, we should also be asking
ourselves why the answer is so often too cruel and painful.” He added, “Now is the time,
the purpose, the season to listen and heal.” in high places.”

Floyd will be buried in a private ceremony alongside his mother, Larcenia “Miss Cissy”
Floyd, whom he called out for as he gasped for breath, lying handcuffed on a Minneapolis
street on Memorial Day. His remains were transported the final mile by horse-drawn car-
riage to his grave site at Houston Memorial Gardens in the suburb of Pearland.

As Floyd’s hearse slowly made its way to the cemetery alongside a police escort, legions of
people lined the road, many with their cellphones aloft, some saluting, a few holding signs.
Parts of the funeral procession route along Pearland’s Cullen Boulevard filled with ob-
servers long before the funeral service ended, many carrying lawn chairs and umbrellas to
provide shade from the broiling Texas sun on a day when the heat index was expected to
reach as high as 107 degrees.

Audrieka Jones, 24, walked a mileand-a-half from where she parked to near the cemetery
entrance to wait for the procession. She was heartened to see so many diverse faces also
waiting along the route.

“T’m seeing more Caucasians standing up than I ever had before,” said Jones, a social
worker who is black. “This is a good thing. It is definitely a good thing.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/2020061 0/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17.

Never again
Mariah Almack, 32, and Elyse Kizer, 27, were among the white mourners waiting for the

procession. Kizer held a black heart-shaped sign reading, “George Floyd.” Almack’s sign
read, “We will keep saying his name.”’

“Tt’s not black people’s responsibility to fix racism,” Almack said. “It’s on white people.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/2020061 0/page/1/textview

3/3
