2020. 6. 17. Businesses begin to hire again as states reopen

Businesses begin to hire again as states reopen

Nonessential companies bring back employees they laid off and expand
their search.

USA TODAY US Edition - 9 Jun 2020 - 1A: Paul Davidson

It’s official: The United States is in a recession.

The National Bureau of Economic Research said Monday the U.S. economy peaked in Fe-
bruary, ending the longest expansion in U.S. history at 128 months, or about 101/2 years.
The announcement codifies the painfully obvious. States began shutting down nonessen-
tial businesses in mid-March to contain the spread of the coronavirus, halting about 30%
of economic activity and putting tens of millions of Americans out of work.

The NBER called the recession about three months after it began, the fastest such determi-
nation since the recession in 1980 and far shorter than the typical nine months to a year,
says Gregory Daco, chief U.S. economist of Oxford Economics.

NBER is a nonprofit organization that conducts research on a wide range of economic is-
sues. It’s best known for its Business Cycle Dating Committee, which calls the beginnings
and ends of recessions.

The expansion began in June 2009, ending the Great Recession that started in December
2007. The economy’s quarterly peak occurred in the fourth quarter of last year, NBER said.
Typically, an economy’s monthly and quarterly peaks coincide. This time, they happened
in different periods because of “the unusual nature of this recession,” NBER said. “The
economy contracted so sharply in March” that several economic measures “were signifi-
cantly below their levels” in the fourth quarter.

A recession is defined as a decline in economic activity that lasts more than a few months,
NBER noted. That may not hold true in this case. Employers shed an unprecedented 1.4.
million jobs in March and 20.7 million in April, but the Labor Department unexpectedly re-
ported 2.5 million job gains in May as states began allowing businesses to reopen in
phases. Millions more jobs are likely to be added in June as more restaurants, shops,
beauty salons and other businesses start up again.

The economy contracted at a 5% annual rate in the first quarter and is expected to shrink
at up to a record 40% rate in the current quarter before mustering a strong rebound in the
third quarter.

Yet the downturn, abruptly engineered by the government to curtail

the virus, has been so severe that it meets the criteria for a recession, NBER said.

“In deciding whether to identify a recession, the committee weighs the depth of the con-
traction, its duration, and whether economic activity declines broadly across the econ-
omy,” the agency said.

NBER “concluded that the unprecedented magnitude of the decline in employment and
production, and its broad reach across the entire economy, warranted designation of this
episode as a recession, even if it turns out to be briefer than earlier contractions.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200609/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Businesses begin to hire again as states reopen

A recession informally has been defined as a decline in economic output that lasts at least
two quarters. Officially, NBER also assesses inflationadjusted income, employment, indus-
trial production and wholesale-retail sales.

Employment peaked in February, according to Labor’s surveys of businesses and house-
holds, NBER said. Since those surveys are conducted during the week that includes the 12th
of the month, ”they understate the collapse of employment during the second half of
March, as indicated by unprecedented levels of new claims for unemployment insurance.”
More than 42 million Americans have filed jobless claims, a reliable gauge of layoffs, since
mid-March.

Although economists expect a strong recovery in the second half of the year, many busi-
nesses have shut down permanently and consumers are likely to return to restaurants,
stores and other gathering spots in large numbers only after a vaccine is available, perhaps
by mid-2021. As a result, damage from the pandemic is likely to last years.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200609/page/1/textview 2/2
