2020. 6. 17. MLB may be sports’ big loser in this pandemic

MLB may be sports’ big loser in this pandemic

Major League Baseball’s troubles won’t be over once the shutdown eventu-
ally ends. In fact, they could grow much worse.

USA TODAY US Edition - 8 Jun 2020 - 1A - Gabe Lacques

As professional sports peeks its collective head out from the cover of a pandemic and me-
thodically finds a path to restarting its leagues, the uncertainty runs far beyond how many
games they might play, whether championships will be awarded and when fans might be
allowed to view it all in person.

 

ePivil™ i

No, the greater unknown lies in what changes brought about by mitigating COVID-19
might become permanent and how they might significantly reorder the sports landscape.
And in many scenarios where a new world order emerges, the biggest loser might very well
be Major League Baseball.

Forget, for a moment, that the league and its players are engaged in a fight over hundreds
of millions of dollars and cannot come to an agreement to play, even as fans grapple with
millions of job losses, more than 100,000 American deaths in a pandemic and a racial reck-
oning decades in the making.

No, even if MLB had its house in order, disruption in the sports industry — namely, the
double-edged sword of cord-cutting and sagging attendance — already put the game’s fi-
nancial model in some peril. The events of 2020, sports industry experts believe, will only
accelerate that — and the current fight between owners and players might only exacerbate
it.

“Frankly, the relationship between MLB and the Players’ Association is one of the things
constraining the future of baseball. They have to work together,” says Marc Ganis, presi-
dent of Chicagobased SportsCorp, a firm that regularly consults with MLB, the NFL and
NBA. “Everything can’t be a battle.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200608/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. MLB may be sports’ big loser in this pandemic

“The players, in their organization, have not felt a need to work with the owners because
the money has continued to roll in. To their perspective, there is no crisis.

But they’re about to get hit in the face with a wet fish. Because after this season, we may
see a meaningful reduction in big, long-term contracts given to players because the teams
cannot project revenue accurately.”

Ganis cites the usual reasons for baseball’s existential crisis: The average age of the fan is
in the low 50s compared

to the 30-something flock of NBA fans. A loss of local broadcast revenue due to cord-cut-
ting, followed further down the road by a potential regional sports network bubble. And
the usual concerns about a game that is too deliberate and too slow to grow a base beyond
its aging core.

The sports world, mid- and post-pandemic, will only be more cutthroat.

NBA moving into MLB territory

In a jungle where football is king and everyone else scrambles for the remaining billions of
dollars to sustain their industries, baseball, hockey, men’s and women’s basketball and
soccer have grown adept at carving out spaces away from Big Football.

For baseball, that meant a near monopoly on the summer months, a perfect runway for its
practically bottomless inventory. But if necessity is the mother of invention, it’s also the
father of encroachment. And for the next two years, the threat of the NBA will grow even
more real.

Should baseball reach an agreement to play this season, it will enjoy an exclusivity window
of only three weeks in early July, as the NBA projects its games will resume in late July.

If both leagues avoid shutdowns caused by a rash of coronavirus cases, baseball will find
itself head-to-head with hoops into its playoffs, as Game 7 of the NBA Finals is tentatively
scheduled for Oct. 12.

Next season will be no better: The NBA plans a Dec. 1 tip-off of the 2020-21 season, push-
ing its regular season into May, the Finals into July, the draft after that. That’s a full season
of moving more of its inventory head-to-head with baseball rather than with football. The
NBA could very well like the results.

“There will be encroachment on the typical MLB calendar,” Ganis says, “and if that is suc-
cessful, they may find ratings and fan interest so great they may encroach another month
or longer on the traditional baseball season. That would be very bad for Major League
Baseball.”

Particularly with the sport already taking a significant drop at the box office, with atten-
dance drops of 4% in 2018 and an additional 1.6% in 2019. Throw in what would likely be
an almost fan-free 2020 season, with health and economic concerns lingering into 2021,
and a sport that still relies on attendance for at least 40% of its revenue will be scrambling
to stanch further losses.

Protecting the base beyond a relatively hardy core in an economy that might suffer for
years will be the challenge.

“T don’t think anything about COVID and the lockdowns we’ve had changes an avid fan’s
connection with the sport,” says Alex Evans, managing director of L.E.K. Consulting. “The
concern might be longer term, if this were to go beyond this season.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200608/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. MLB may be sports’ big loser in this pandemic

“It’s harder to bring fans back in, and a lot of sports fandom is passed down from genera-
tions. The longer you don’t have that opportunity, you do have that issue.

“Tt’s really the casual fan who on the whim buys day-of-game tickets and gets bleacher
seats for the family. That may suffer more. On the margins, there’s more concerns about
the experience or being in a larger group setting.”

Fighting over money doesn’t help

MLB remains a $10 billion industry, and its demise is far from imminent, particularly with
local TV contracts such as the Dodgers’ 25-year deal, signed in January 2013, that’s valued
at $8.35 billion. Equity stakes in networks ensure many franchises get an even bigger piece
of their own pie than traditional TV deals.

But as cord-cutting increases, and the gold rush of deals signed last decade begin to sun-
set, franchises might feel immediate and long-term effects. This winter, assuming base-
ball manages to hammer out a deal and play a 2020 season, the sport’s current problems —
lack of recognition for its biggest stars, a slow game, a labor war that will brew through
2021 — and its extended ones might collide.

Consider that by the time opening day 2021 comes around, several franchises might have
played as few as 50 games since September 2019. In that same span, NBA teams will have
played more than 130 games.

Good luck marketing emerging stars like Juan Soto, Ronald Acuna Jr. and Bo Bichette when
the likes of Mike Trout and Bryce Harper have long been absent from everyone’s TV. That’s
largely due to the timing of the COVID-19 outbreak, which was totally out of MLB’s hands.
That can’t be said for the rest of its issues.

“Being out of sight really does mean being out of mind, in this case,” Ganis says. “It
doesn’t help that the perception is players and owners are battling over money when the
rest of the country is hurting terribly.

“Wait until next offseason. I think players will be shocked at how many teams are unable
to project accurate revenue and be reticent to give out bigmoney contracts. Not because of
collusion, but because of not being able to project revenues correctly.”

Just in time for the next labor showdown, after a 2021 season that might be played ina
new, less-forgiving landscape.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200608/page/1/textview 3/3
