2020. 6. 17. In Houston, Floyd changed lives

In Houston, Floyd changed lives

Private funeral is today in his childhood hometown

USA TODAY US Edition - 9 Jun 2020 - 1A - Rick Jervis

HOUSTON - Before his death made him a catalyst for global protests, George Floyd men-
tored young men at the Cuney Homes housing project in Houston’s Third Ward, urging
them to quit violence and seek a better life.

  

iM ee
When Tiffany Cofield, then a teacher at Hope Academy charter school in the Third Ward,
struggled to connect with her most troubled students, she turned to Floyd for help. Floyd,
who was 40 at the time, was disarmingly soft-spoken and listened to Cofield’s complaints
and aspirations for the kids, she said.
More importantly, her students listened to Floyd. One boy was a talented football player
struggling to keep his grades up. After Cofield recruited Floyd to talk to him, the student’s
grades suddenly improved. He graduated high school and went on to play football at a ju-
nior college, Cofield said.
“There were times he had more of an impact than their own parents,” she said of Floyd’s
relationship with her students. “They didn’t want to disappoint him.”
“There were times he had more of an impact than their own parents. They didn’t want to
disappoint him.”
Tiffany Cofield, former charter school teacher, on Floyd’s mentoring relationship with her
students
Memorials are planned in Houston this week for Floyd, 46, who died while in police cus-
tody in Minneapolis on May 25. The former police officer who pressed his knee into Floyd’s
neck for nearly nine minutes during the arrest was arrested and charged with secondde-
gree murder, and three other officers on the scene were charged with aiding and abetting
second-degree murder.
Outrage over Floyd’s death unleashed worldwide demonstrations, including mostly peace-
ful protests in every state in the USA. Last week, memorials were held in Minneapolis,

where Floyd last lived, and North Carolina, where he was born.
https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200609/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. In Houston, Floyd changed lives

Monday, Houston hosted a six-hour public visitation. Today, a private funeral service is
planned. Floyd is to be buried alongside his mother at Houston Memorial Gardens in Pear-
land. Al Sharpton is to deliver the eulogy.

To his friends in his childhood hometown of Houston, Floyd was remembered as a musi-
cian, a former student athlete and a loving brother and father.

“He Third Ward,” Cofield said. South of downtown Houston, the Third Ward has been
home to freed slaves since the end of the Civil War and site of important landmarks such as
Jack Yates Senior High School, the city’s second African American high school, and Eman-
cipation Park, the first park for black Houstonians.

Floyd grew up in the neighborhood’s Cuney Homes, also known as “The Bricks,” a housing
project flushed with gang violence and crime. Known as “Big Floyd,” he put out rap mix
tapes with the influential hip hop collective Screwed Up Click in the 1990s and was a
standout athlete at Jack Yates High School. By the time he left high school, he was 6 feet, 6
inches tall and weighed more than 200 pounds. He was known as someone who used his
formidable size to break up fights.

Monday, residents and bystanders flocked to a mural of Floyd spread across the back wall
of the Scott Food Store, across the street from the Cuney Homes. Some dropped balloons or
lit religious candles. Others took selfies or dropped roses, their stems crammed into plastic
water bottles.

Eva Fulghum, 37, touched Floyd’s likeness, made the sign of the cross, then wiped his face
with a small red towel. “Wiping his tears,” she said.

Fulghum said she grew up with Floyd and knew him and his mother well. She said she
hopes people will celebrate Floyd as much as mourn him.

“TI don’t want people to grieve,”

“God does a lot of things, but he doesn’t do mistakes. He had a mission for my brother.”
ZsaZsa Floyd, George Floyd’s older sister

Fulghum said.

Bevan Walker, 50, was bicycling through Houston’s Third Ward Monday morning when he
stopped at the mural on Nalle Street. He snapped a photo of it with his phone.

“There’s something special about his life and his family,” Walker said. “His name is going
to be synonymous with justice for generations to come.”

An adjoining wall was filled with more than 200 names of people who have died in Hous-
ton’s Third Ward, many of them because of street violence.

Kim Hewitt, 45, was among those gathered at the mural. She said it’s important to memo-
rialize Floyd, but she hoped the international spotlight shining on Houston this week also
reveals the scourge of violence taking so many lives in inner cities.

“We have a lot of work to do,” she said. Those close to Floyd turned to their personal
memories of his time in Houston. ZsaZsa Floyd, his older sister, remembers Floyd rushing
home after his first day at Yates High. As a ninth grader, he made the varsity football team,
a squad stacked with some of the best players in the city. A year later, he would co-captain
the basketball team, she said.

“He came home yelling, ‘I made it made it! I made varsity!’ “ZsaZsa said. “He was so ex-
cited. His face just lit up.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200609/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. In Houston, Floyd changed lives

Floyd also delved into his spiritual side, attending church and spreading the gospel, she
said. As a young man, he would drop to his knees in the middle of a grocery store, giving
glory to God, Zsa Zsa said. “He had a good spirit,” she said.

ZsaZsa said she can’t believe she’ll never hear her brother’s voice or bellowing laugh again
but trusts he died for a reason.

“God does a lot of things, but he doesn’t do mistakes,” she said. “(He had a mission for my
brother.”

Floyd had several brushes with the law. Starting in 1997, he was arrested on various drug
and theft charges, according to Harris County District Court records. In 2009, he went to
state prison after pleading guilty to charges of armed aggravated robbery. When he was re-
leased in 2013, he returned to the Third Ward, determined to steer youth away from the
same decisions that stole so many years from him.

Chris Johnson, a minister at Good Hope Missionary Baptist Church, got to know Floyd
while hosting twice-a-week outreach programs at Cuney Homes in 2013. Floyd showed up
to the meetings every Tuesday and Wednesday at the housing project’s community center
and helped Johnson connect with the youth.

Floyd had the double-barrel street cred of being a former student athlete and budding rap
artist who rubbed elbows with homegrown artists such as Cal Wayne and Trae tha Truth,
Johnson said.

“Just having his presence there really helped solidify things in the neighborhood,” he said.
“He helped a lot of conflicted and confused people.”

Floyd felt he needed to leave Houston and get a fresh start, Cofield said. He found it when
he learned of a minister who was helping troubled Third Ward residents relocate to Min-
neapolis. He made the move.

Floyd reveled in his new surroundings. He hung out with Houston friends who had relo-
cated to Minneapolis. He liked how nice people were and enjoyed the pro sports teams the
Twin Cities offered, Cofield said.

“He liked Minnesota because it was an opportunity to start over,” she said. “He kept
telling me, ‘You have to come out to Minnesota to visit.’ “

Cofield said she hopes people reflect this week on the “gentle giant” that Floyd was and
remember he was a brother, dad and friend to many people. Floyd left behind a daughter,
Gianna, 6.

One of his dreams, Cofield said, was rereleasing rap tapes he recorded in the 1990s, maybe
recruiting some popular rappers to join him. Floyd reminded Cofield — or, “Stiff,” as he
called her — of this aspiration during a chat in June 2018.

His goal wasn’t just monetary — he wanted to influence the younger generation with a
message of steering away from violence and bettering their lives, Cofield said.

“He looked at me and said, ‘Man, Stiff, I’m going to change the world,’ ” she said. “I didn’t
know he meant that literally.”

Wayne, one of the Third Ward’s bestknown rappers, was Floyd’s next door neighbor grow-
ing up in the Cuney Homes. When Wayne was 12, his mom went to prison and he moved in
with Floyd and his mother, sparking a lifelong friendship.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200609/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. In Houston, Floyd changed lives

Floyd became Wayne’s earliest supporter, encouraging him to keep rapping and recording.
When Wayne landed in prison in 2014 on drug charges, Floyd visited him frequently, urg-
ing him to stay humble and retrieving a $20,000 advance owed Wayne from an indepen-
dent Houston label.

“He really helped me get through it,” said Wayne, who will be one of Floyd’s pallbearers
during Houston services this week. “I wish the world knew him the way I knew him.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200609/page/1/textview 4/4
