2020. 6. 17. Democrats unveil broad reforms for policing in US

Democrats unveil broad reforms for policing in US
Legislation aims to bolster accountability, end chokeholds

USA TODAY US Edition - 9 Jun 2020 + 1A - William Cummings, Ledyard King and Christal Hayes

WASHINGTON — Congressional Democrats proposed a sweeping package of police reforms
Monday amid national protests over the death of George Floyd — with lawmakers calling
for mandatory dashboard and body cameras, an end to police chokeholds, and the creation
of a national registry to track officers with a record of misconduct.

Before unveiling the Justice in Policing Act of 2020 at a Capitol Hill news conference, Pelosi
and more than 20 other Democrats knelt for eight minutes and 46 seconds — the exact
amount of time Minneapolis police officer Derek Chauvin knelt on Floyd’s neck as the un-
armed black man lay handcuffed in the street, gasping for breath, before he died.

The nearly nine minutes of solemn quietude in the Capitol’s Emancipation Hall, led by
House Speaker Nancy Pelosi and Senate Democratic Leader Chuck Schumer, was a fresh
example of how the death of Floyd and other African Americans at the hands of police has
prompted a new debate about race and policing in America. It has given social justice advo-
cates new hope that the country is at a turning point on race relations.

The legislation aims to bolster police accountability and end the practice of aggres

sive officers moving from one department to another by creating a national registry to
track those with checkered records. It also would end certain police practices, such as the
use of no-knock warrants and chokeholds, which have led to recent deaths of African
Americans.

Breonna Taylor, a 26-year-old Louisville ER technician, was killed in her Kentucky home
March 13 after police used a no-knock warrant to enter her house during a narcotics raid.
The Democrats’ bill would also end qualified immunity for officers, making them person-
ally liable for constitutional violations such as excessive force. Other provisions include:

I Reducing racial profiling by police and mandating officers undergo training.

I Limiting the transfer of military weaponry to police departments.

I Banning no-knock warrants in drug cases.

I Making lynching a federal hate crime.

I Requiring dashboard cameras and body cameras for federal officers, and requiring state
and local law enforcement to use existing federal funds to ensure the use of police body
cameras.

1 Amending the federal criminal statute to prosecute police misconduct from “willfulness”
to a “recklessness” standard.

I Requiring state and local law enforcement agencies to report use of force data by race,
sex, disability, religion, and age.

“That moment of national anguish is being transformed into a movement of national ac-
tion as Americans from across the country peacefully protest to demand an end to injus-
tice,” Pelosi, DCalif., said at the news conference, referring to Floyd’s killing. “We cannot
settle for anything less than transformative, structural change.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200609/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Democrats unveil broad reforms for policing in US

The legislation incorporates some elements of the 40-plus bills House Democrats have
floated in recent weeks.

Sen. Kamala Harris, D-Calif., said the bill would increase “consequences and accountabil-
ity” for law enforcement, but she said more would need to be done to address systemic
racism and inequalities in the justice system.

“Part of what has been upside down in policing policy in America, is that we have confused
having safe communities with hiring more cops,” Harris, a former prosecutor, said during
Monday’s news conference. “In fact, the real way to achieve safe and healthy communities
is to invest in those communities.”

Harris called for increasing access to affordable housing, expanding home ownership, cre-
ating greater job opportunities, improving public schools and easing access to capital in
African American neighborhoods.

This weekend’s protests drew tens of thousands of people to demonstrations in Washing-
ton and across the country, some of the largest crowds since Floyd died on May 25. The
gatherings were largely peaceful and free of the looting and violent clashes with police that
broke out at some demonstrations during the initial wave of protests.

President Donald Trump — who had criticized some governors as “weak” for their han-
dling of the protests and threatened to use active duty troops to quell the unrest — tweeted
Sunday he was ordering National Guard members to withdraw from Washington. Trump
said “everything is under perfect control” after a week of peaceful protests.

A Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll released Sunday found most Americans are more con-
cerned about the actions of the Minneapolis police that led to Floyd’s death (59%) than
they are by the violence at some protests (27%). The poll of 745 people from May 29 to
June 2 and has a margin of error of 3.6%.

“That moment of national anguish is being transformed into a movement of national ac-
tion as Americans from across the country peacefully protest to demand an end to injus-
tice.” House Speaker Nancy Pelosi

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200609/page/1/textview 2/2
