2020. 6. 17. I Jobless: Over 10 weeks, more than 40 million apply for unemployment.

I Jobless: Over 10 weeks, more than 40 million apply for un-
employment.

Even after reopening, tough times may persist

USA TODAY US Edition - 29 May 2020 - 1A - Charisse Jones

The number of Americans struggling to make ends meets continues to grow, even as the
economy begins to restart after virtually shutting down to slow the coronavirus pandemic.
About 2.1 million Americans filed initial unemployment benefit claims last week, the Labor
Department said Thursday

In just 10 weeks, 40.7 million have sought jobless benefits, which represent the most reli-
able gauge of layoffs.

The volume of claims has been steadily slipping. The latest claims tally fell below the 2.4
million who filed claims the week before, and the record 6.9 million who sought assistance
in late March.

And that trend is expected to continue. Economic research consultancy Pantheon Macroe-
conomics predicts initial unemployment applications could fall below 1 million by the end
of next month, “for the first time since mid-March.”

But the number of claims is still immense, reflecting a 14.7% unemployment rate that is
the highest since the Great Depression.

Oxford Economics expects the unemployment rate to continue to grow, reaching roughly
20% in May before declining, though it likely will still be in double digits by the end of
2020.

“Even though we look for the economy to recoup 17 million jobs this year, or 60% of lost
jobs, the unemployment

The IRS noted that the free, prepaid card provides consumer protections available to tradi-
tional bank account owners, including protection against fraud, loss and other errors.

The Visa debit cards associated with the program do not charge any monthly fees or fees if
the card is not used for a length of time. Also, your money does not expire on the cards.
Are you sure this isn’t a scam?

Unfortunately, many thought that they spotted a new scam when they saw these envelopes
pop up in the mail last week, according to Iowa Attorney General Tom Miller in a report in
the The Des Moines Register, part of the USA TODAY Network.

If you receive one of these cards, you must first activate your card — by phone or online —
before you can use it. You’re going to need to provide your name, address and Social Secu-
rity number to validate your identity, according to an online how-to provided by the Con-
sumer Financial Protection Bureau.

You’ll also need to create a four-digit PIN so you can get cash at the ATM. If you forget
your PIN, you can call customer service to get a new one. And first make sure to check the
balance to know how much you received. You can read more information on how to use the
cards to avoid any fees at consumerfinance.gov.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200529/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. I Jobless: Over 10 weeks, more than 40 million apply for unemployment.

For example, consumers would want to use one of the In- Network AllPoint brand ATMs to
withdraw cash. Go to EIPCard.com to find such an ATM or use the Money Network Mobile
App to locate one near you. Limits may apply to the amount of cash you are able to with-
draw at ATMs.

What if you threw away the card?

The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau how-to offers some suggestions for consumers
who may have received these Visa debit cards with stimulus cash but then pitched the
plastic cards for some reason.

“Tf you think you have misplaced your card, go to EIPCard.com and lock your card to pre-
vent unauthorized transactions or ATM withdrawals while you look for it,” the CFPB said.
Call customer service at 800-2408100 to report your lost or stolen card immediately. Your
card will be deactivated so nobody can use it.

There is a $7.50 fee to get a replacement card. rate will still be around 10% by yearend,”
Oxford said in a note.

The flood of unemployment claims is so great, overwhelmed state systems have struggled
to process the millions of applications. While the backlog is easing, it is still significant,
says Andrew Stettner, senior fellow at The Century Foundation.

“The percentage of all claims being paid jumped from just 14% by the end of March to
47.3% by the end of April, a big improvement, but still reflecting major delays in payments
that have bedeviled state agencies and frustrated millions of workers,” Stettner said.

As the country gradually begins to reopen, with restaurants, barbershops and other busi-
nesses welcoming back customers, a rebound could be on the horizon, economists say.
“While the worse in terms of shutdowns is likely in the rear-view mirror, navigating the
economy out of the crisis will take some time ...” Ksenia Bushmeneva, TD Economics
“Tentative signs of economic stabilization are ... beginning to emerge,” Ksenia
Bushmeneva, an economist with TD Economics, said in an investors note. “However, the
economy is still in a very deep hole, ... While the worse in terms of shutdowns is likely in
the rear-view mirror, navigating the economy out of the crisis will take some time as the
rate of recovery will differ across states and industries.”

In the early weeks of the pandemic, the retail, hospitality and leisure sectors were hardest
hit as residents were told to stay home, retailers and restaurants closed, and travel virtu-
ally stopped. Those industries may be slow to regain their footing, Bushmeneva said,
“leading to permanent job losses.”

Oxford Economics agreed that some short-term job cuts could be long-lasting.

“While many workers will likely be recalled once lock downs are relaxed,” it said, “de-
pressed income and spending, lingering virus fear, and mandated capacity restrictions will
likely mean half of all temporary layoffs could become permanent.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200529/page/1/textview 2/2
