2020. 6. 17. Most back White House protests

Most back White House protests
Poll finds wide opposition to use of force at Lafayette Park

USA TODAY US Edition - 11 Jun 2020 - 1A - Susan Page and Sarah Elbeshbishi

The police crackdown to clear protesters from Lafayette Square last week looms as a defin-
ing moment in the national debate over race and law enforcement that followed the death
of George Floyd.

) How much do you
4 | support or oppose -
lm protesting peacefully
outside the White House?

 

peaceful protest outside the White House — a view held by nearly 9 of 10 people across
racial and partisan lines. Nearly 9 of 10 heard about the clashes that cleared demonstrators
before President Donald Trump walked across the square to stand in front of historic St.
John’s Church, holding aloft a Bible.

In their wake, Americans by 22 percentage points express more trust in the Black Lives
Matter movement to promote justice and racial equality than they do in the president of
the United States. Former President Barack Obama is more than twice as likely as Trump to
be seen as a president who could best handle this moment of civil unrest.

Two-thirds of Americans, 63%, oppose the show of force that swept the protesters from
the park just north of the White House, the scene of many demonstrations in the past.
Almost half, 44%, say they “strongly” oppose it.

“That was a bad call,” says Aaron Jones, 40, a Republican from Katy, Texas.

Charles Ritt, 56, a Democrat from Roseville, Minnesota, who watched the scene unfold on
TV, called it “disgusting and ridiculous.”

Some of those surveyed side with law enforcement.

“That’s kind of sad that force had to be used,” says Jane Gillespie, 26, a Republican from
Glendale, Arizona. “But it seemed like they felt like there was a threat to the president, and
that’s why they were acting the way they did.”

Thirty percent of those surveyed, including 50% of Republicans, support the use of rubber
bullets and tear gas in the park.

The online poll of 1,113 adults, taken Monday and Tuesday, has a credibility interval, akin
to a margin of error, of plus or minus 3.3 percentage points.

Divisions along racial and especially partisan lines remain, including when it comes to
finding the right balance between protecting peaceful protests and ensuring law and order.
Americans are split down the middle: 45% say law and order should be the priority, 44%
say the right to protest should be the priority.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/2020061 1/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Most back White House protests

Biden more trusted

The poll underscores the degree to which the president’s provocative comments about the
demonstrations in particular and the issue of racial justice in general seem out of step with
the mood of the country.

The poll was in the field when Trump posted a tweet Tuesday that promoted an unsub-
stantiated conspiracy theory about a 75-year-old protester who was pushed to the ground
and injured by police in Buffalo, New York.

Thirty-eight percent of Americans say they trust Trump to promote justice and equal
treatment for people of all races — much lower than the Black Lives Matter movement,
trusted by 60%, or the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee, Joe Biden, trusted
by 51%.

Asked to choose among the current president and the four former presidents who are liv-
ing, 45% of Americans identify Obama as the one best suited to handle the challenges.
Twenty percent choose Trump.

Among Democrats, 75% choose Obama. Among Republicans, 43% choose Trump, lower
than the support he and his actions generally command within the GOP. Eighteen percent
of Republicans choose former President George W. Bush and 15% choose Obama.

“T think it speaks volumes that the (former) presidents have kind of unified and that so
much of the country is unified in its feeling,” says Brittany Baca, 31, a Democrat from Ore-
gon City, Oregon. Trump “is making opposite, opposing statements” that she calls “atro-
cious.”

Baca, the daughter of a police officer, says cellphone videos showing police violence
against Floyd and other African Americans were an awakening for her and others. “It just
breaks our hearts to hear what’s going on in the country,” she says. “This feels terrible to
say, but it’s really opened our eyes to the fact that it’s happening.”

Mostly peaceful or mostly violent?

On some questions, the partisan divide is yawning.

I Three-fourths of Democrats, 73%, say the protests after Floyd’s death have been mostly
peaceful; a 54% majority of Republicans say they have been mostly violent.

I Two-thirds of Democrats, 65%, say the right to protest is the most important thing to
ensure, “even if it means there are some incidents of violence.” Two-thirds of Republi-
cans, 69%, say law and order is the most important thing to ensure, “even if it means lim-
iting peaceful protests.”

I Three-fourths of Democrats, 75%, oppose the idea of deploying U.S. military forces to
states in the wake of the Lafayette Square protest. Two-thirds of Republicans, 68%, sup-
port the idea.

“Views toward George Floyd’s killing and the subsequent protests tell a tale of two Ameri-
cas,” says Cliff Young, president of Ipsos.

There are jarring differences along partisan lines about what institutions and forces can be
trusted to promote justice and equal treatment. Republicans most trust the U.S. military
(89%) and police and law enforcement (79%). Democrats most trust Black Lives Matter
(84%) and Joe Biden (78%).

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/2020061 1/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Most back White House protests

The divide is also racial. Black people express much lower levels of trust in police and law
enforcement than white people do, 28% compared with 65%.

A solid majority of Americans agree on some basics. Sixty percent say Floyd was murdered;
just 2% say the police officer “did nothing wrong.” Sixty-five percent support the
protests, and 87% support protesting peacefully outside the White House.

Lafayette Square continues to be a center of protest activity. D.C. Mayor Muriel Bowser re-
named a section of the street “Black Lives Matter Plaza,” and a makeshift shrine to Floyd
covers part of an expanded security fence around the White House.

“By protesting and reacting, that shows me that people still have a sense of humanity
about them, and they believe ... that their expression of how they feel and what they think
can still have the desired effect,” says Maira Nigam, 62, a Democrat from Stamford, Con-
necticut. “We'll see if that holds up.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/2020061 1/page/1/textview 3/3
