2020. 6. 17. Trump's Juneteenth controversy

Trump’s Juneteenth controversy
Trump already criticized for handling of protests

USA TODAY US Edition - 12 Jun 2020 - 1A - Courtney Subramanian Contributing: Joel Shannon, Susan Page and Sarah
Elbeshbishi

The president’s plan to stage a rally in Tulsa on the day marking the end of slavery faces
backlash.

 

WASHINGTON - President Donald Trump’s decision to hold his first rally in three months
in Tulsa, the location of one of the worst massacres of African Americans in U.S. history, is
triggering controversy as he wrestles with criticism over his handling of nationwide
protests against police brutality and racism.

Trump plans to visit Oklahoma on June 19 for the first of several big campaign events. It
will be his first rally since an event in Charlotte, North Carolina, on March 2. The trip
comes after weeks of protests over the death of George Floyd, an unarmed black man who
was pinned to the ground for nearly nine minutes under the knee of a Minneapolis police
officer.

Trump put his massive campaign rallies on hiatus for a few months while much of the
country was locked down amid the coronavirus pandemic.

June 19, or Juneteenth, is also known as Emancipation Day and commemorates the date in
1865 when Maj. Gen. Gordon Granger traveled to Galveston, Texas, to inform residents
that President Abraham Lincoln had freed the slaves and that slave owners had to comply
with the Emancipation Proclamation.

This month, Tulsa marked a grim date — the 99th anniversary of the Tulsa race massacre
in which a white mob ravaged a thriving African American business community in the
Greenwood District known as the “Black Wall Street.” Estimates suggest as many as 300
people were killed, and scores of homes and businesses were destroyed.

Alicia Andrews, chair of the Oklahoma Democratic Party, said Trump was

“thumbing his nose at the real issue of racial inequity.”

“There’s a man’s words, and then there are his actions,” she said. “Him coming here on
that date, without making any outreach to the community, and saying it’s for unity, itis a
slap in the face.”

Rep. Al Green, D-Texas, a member of the Congressional Black Caucus, tweeted Thursday
that holding the rally in Tulsa was “overt racism from the highest office in the land.”
Trump’s campaign said the timing and location of the rally were deliberate, and his team
views it as a chance to tout his “record of success for black Americans.”

Trump faces rising criticism, including from Republicans, for his response to the growing
Black Lives Matter movement — three words etched in yellow paint on a street outside the

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/2020061 2/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Trump's Juneteenth controversy

White House.

In the wake of Floyd’s death and the outrage that followed, Trump has said little about
racial inequality, focusing instead on restoring “law and order” in American streets and
lambasting protesters as “thugs” and looters.

Members of Trump’s own administration, including Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
Mark Milley, distanced themselves from a decision to forcefully clear a park outside the
White House of peaceful protesters so Trump could walk to nearby St. John’s Church and
hold up a Bible before television cameras.

Mechelle Brown, program coordinator and tour guide for the Greenwood Cultural Center in
Tulsa, said the organization had not heard from the president or the Trump campaign
about his planned visit and does not expect to.

“The community doesn’t feel that Trump is genuinely interested in the history of the
Greenwood district,” Brown said, “and that his visit to Tulsa during Juneteenth, as we are
commemorating the 99-year anniversary of the massacre, is insulting.”

Brown said the black community in Tulsa was “incredibly anxious” about the rally.

“You have people who are proudly waving their Confederate flag against the backdrop of
African Americans and others — white allies — who are continuing to protest George
Floyd’s death and police brutality,” she said. “We just see the potential of there being a
clash.”

Senior Trump campaign adviser Katrina Pierson said in a statement that Trump’s visit was
entirely appropriate.

“As the party of Lincoln, Republicans are proud of the history of Juneteenth, which is the
anniversary of the last reading of the Emancipation Proclamation,” she said. “President
Trump has built a record of success for Black Americans, including unprecedented low
unemployment prior to the global pandemic, all-time high funding for Historically Black
Colleges and Universities, and criminal justice reform.”

AUSA TODAY/Ipsos Poll released this week found the walk across Lafayette Square ap-
peared to be a defining moment for the president. Nearly 9 of 10 Americans heard about
the incident. Two-thirds of Americans, 63%, oppose the show of force that swept the pro-
testers from the park, and almost half, 44%, say they “strongly” oppose it.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/2020061 2/page/1/textview 2/2
