2020. 6. 17. School lunch programs could be broke by fall

School lunch programs could be broke by fall

Nutrition plans across the USA have transformed into emergency feeding
operations, but losses are growing every day.

USA TODAY US Edition - 2 Jun 2020 - 1A: Daphne Duret

The line of cars usually begins to form well before 11 a.m. outside Sharon Elementary
school in Newburgh, Indiana, a town of less than 4,000 people along the Ohio River.

   

Stella Antey, an 8-year-old secondgrader, has sat in one of those cars with her older sister,
younger brother and parents every weekday for the past two months. The wait for cafeteria
workers to hand them free lunches and breakfasts for the next day has often been the
highlight of their mornings since schools closed in March.

“My favorite is the breakfast,” she says. “I like the cereal and milk.”

Her mother, high school civics and dance teacher Amanda Antey, enjoys the break the trips
give her children from the sometimes restrictive learnfrom-home routine.

Still, the free meals are far from a luxury. Antey and her drama teacher husband, Eric, still
receive pay from Warrick County but can no longer teach the after-school dance and the-
ater classes that provided extra income for their young family of five. Antey says that loss,
along with rising food prices during the pandemic, makes the free school meals for their
three children crucial.

“Nothing goes to waste,” Amanda Antey says. “Whatever the kids don’t eat, my husband
and I eat it.”

Necessity — both to prevent students from going hungry and to keep the people feeding
them safe — is what drives Shenae Rowe through the long days and weekends since she
joined hundreds of

“Nothing goes to waste. Whatever the kids don’t eat, my husband and I eat it.” Amanda
Antey Teacher receiving meals for her children

school nutrition directors across the country who, in a matter of days, transformed their
school meal operations into emergency feeding programs.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200602/page/1/textview 115
2020. 6. 17. School lunch programs could be broke by fall

The efforts come at a price. In the past 10 weeks alone, school districts and nonprofit orga-
nizations tasked with feeding children during the pandemic have lost at least $1 billion.
The losses climb with every lunch and breakfast workers serve and could force programs
across the county to go into debt or dip into money dedicated to teachers and classrooms
to stay afloat.

Challenges have come from all sides.

Although nearly half of America’s schoolchildren were on free or reduced lunch before the
pandemic, school shutdowns eliminated the revenue that came from other children whose
families paid for the meals.

At the same time, costs have soared. Protective equipment for employees, extra cleaning
measures, steps to ensure social distancing in food prep, hazard pay in some cases — they
all cost more. It’s also more expensive to package meals that can be taken home or to buy
individually wrapped foods that are more portable and easier to serve from a social dis-
tance than the soups and family-style meals cafeteria workers used to ladle out one at a
time to long lines of children.

All told, spending for many feeding programs has outstripped federal reimbursements for
the emergency meals. The House’s most recent relief bill allocated $3 billion for child nu-
trition programs from now through September 2021, but the bill will face heavy challenges
in the Senate, and school food coordinators say they’re unclear on how much of that
money will go to individual districts even if it passes.

Still in emergency mode, school nutrition directors like Rowe, whose program has lost
$500,000 since March, say they’re too overwhelmed to even begin thinking about what
they’ll do

when schools reopen in the fall.

“Honestly, we haven’t been able to get past looking at today, day by day and week by
week,” Rowe said. “We just keep going.”

Cash-poor, cost-rich

In Orlando, Florida, where nearly three-quarters of students at Orange County Public
Schools qualified for free or reduced-price lunch, Laura Gilbert said her food service pro-
gram nonetheless brought in $2.2 million from paid lunches in March of last year.

This year, Gilbert estimates her program lost $4 million in March. That number grew to $6
million to $8 million in April and probably the same for May.

Emergency meals have now all but wiped out the cash reserves Gilbert took years to build.
Without outside help, she said, there will be no more money left by August.

Orange County schools averaged 1 million meals served to students every five days when
they were open. The emergency program now Serves 115,000 to 117,000 meals a day, strug-
gling to find prepackaged items like the cereal bars that were popular with students for
breakfast before schools closed.

For years Gilbert had worked to keep product and labor costs down wherever she could
while offering students meals like freshly baked pizzas, hummus from scratch and trendy
dishes like Korean stir-fry tacos.

But even those innovations, she said, cost less to produce than the emergency meals the
district serves from 52 locations on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays, sending each stu-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200602/page/1/textview 2/5
2020. 6. 17. School lunch programs could be broke by fall

dent home with six meals every Friday.

“That’s our biggest challenge because it costs a lot more money to give out four or six
meals at a time as opposed to having a kid come through the lunch line and get one break-
fast or one lunch,” Gilbert said.

Julie Beer, food service coordinator for the Ukiah Unified School District in Mendocino
County, California, said her team is already “grasping at straws to keep the kids fed.”
About 80% of the 6,000 students in the district are low-income, a percentage so high that
it qualifies all students for free meals. The district is serving about 57,000 free meals a
week, either at distribution points where families drive through to pick up items or by
school bus delivery at drop-off points.

Katie Wilson, executive director of the Urban School Food Alliance, says the 12 large school
districts in her association, which includes Orlando, are losing $38.9 million a week by
serving food to their students during the school closures.

Diane Pratt-Heavner, spokeswoman for the School Nutrition Association, said the 861 dis-
tricts in the survey who agreed to list their lost revenue reported collective losses of $626.4
million.

The price of safety

As much as Rowe’s program has lost, money is a secondary concern. Although the Anteys
and other families have shown overwhelming support for the five-day-a-week food dis-
tributions, Rowe knows that it also increases the chance of a coronavirus outbreak if one of
her staffers is infected.

“Every time I get a text early in the morning, I’m afraid I’m going to look at my phone and
get a message that someone (working in the cafeteria) has gotten sick,” she said.

The fear is real. Soon after schools across the country started emergency feeding pro-
grams, several had to either shut down temporarily or move to other locations after food
prep workers tested positive for the coronavirus.

Most recently, officials in Puerto Rico ordered the shutdown of 30 school cafeterias and a
few food warehouses after dozens of workers in the U.S. territory tested positive for the
novel coronavirus.

A group of mothers and several nonprofits responded by suing the island’s Department of
Education, accusing it of dodging its responsibility to feed the island’s nearly 300,000
public school children.

Because of the risks, school food service leaders in many places offer hazard pay to front-
line workers, and large cafeterias designed to cook a high volume of meals operate at only
a fraction of their capacities so workers can operate at a safe distance.

Pratt-Heavner says many members of her association are already reporting shortages of
personal protection equipment like masks and gloves, as well as a shortage of cleaning
supplies.

And school food coordinators like Gilbert say they are saddled with the additional food
safety costs of transporting and storing items like milk, meat and juice at cold tempera-
tures.

Gilbert had to rent 15 refrigerated trucks to store large quantities of items that her staff is
now handing out in bulk from a few centralized locations instead of the many schools they

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200602/page/1/textview 3/5
2020. 6. 17. School lunch programs could be broke by fall

served from daily when school was in session.

Reimbursements not enough

Aside from cash reserves, if they had any, these school programs now depend almost ex-
clusively on government reimbursements from a U.S. Department of Agriculture program
normally designed to feed students during summer and winter breaks.

USDA’s Summer Food Service Program has also been a resource for school food programs
in emergency situations, like hurricanes or tornadoes. But the program has never been
used for a crisis this widespread.

The reimbursement rate for most sites is $2.375 per breakfast and $4.15 for every lunch.
But Gilbert and other food service coordinators are often surpassing that amount because
they’re having to pay more for individually wrapped items, increased transport costs and
packaging.

Congress in March passed a measure that cleared the way for families to receive food
stamp benefitsto cover the cost of meals children would have normally eaten in school.
Only 30 states have qualified for the program so far, and school food officials say lines are
still long at their drive-thru and walk-up meal pickups.

On April 27, a group of more than three dozen national school associations, nutritional
groups and other nonprofits sent a letter urging Congress to provide school meal programs
nationwide with $2.6 billion in the next congressional relief package “to mitigate a portion
of the estimated, significant financial loss that school nutrition programs have and will
continue to experience.”

The House responded by including $3 billion earmarked for school nutrition programs in
the $3 trillion Heroes Act, which passed in May by a narrow margin. Senate Majority
Leader Mitch McConnell said last week that if lawmakers consider another relief bill it
would have to be narrower in scope than what the House passed.

Grim outlook for fall

As stretched thin as school food operations are now, program leaders say their needs will
only intensify if schools reopen in the fall, especially if there’s no money for school nutri-
tion in another relief bill.

Aside from social distancing for students, schools will also have to figure out how to pre-
pare and serve foods in cafeterias while adhering to social distancing measures for em-
ployees.

And while cafeterias are already running low on protective equipment and cleaning sup-
plies, Wilson and others say they’ ll need a stockpile of those items before they welcome
children back.

Pratt-Heavner of the School Nutrition Association predicts that the increased need for free
and reduced lunch will present another problem that schools will have to handle in the fall.
In current emergency feeding programs, children and parents don’t have to prove that
they qualify for free meals. That will change in the fall, and with unemployment rates sky-
rocketing because of the pandemic, it is unclear how much more profound the needs will
be.

And unless schools receive a special waiver to serve all meals for free, they will have to
charge children full price for meals unless their parents complete and turn in free lunch

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200602/page/1/textview 4/5
2020. 6. 17. School lunch programs could be broke by fall

applications.

“The application is challenging, and they also have to be processed,” PrattHeavner said.
“At a time when schools and parents will already be dealing with a number of complicated
questions, they’d also have to worry about that.”

Another concern, for Gilbert, Rowe and other food service coordinators across the county,
is that the quality of the meals they feed students will suffer, meaning children like Stella
Antey won’t have as many healthy options at school — whether they pay for them or not.

“Things won’t be as fresh,” Gilbert says. “We won’t be able to cook as much from
scratch.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200602/page/1/textview 5/5
