2020. 6. 17. Activists worry violence distorts message

Activists worry violence distorts message

USA TODAY US Edition - 1 Jun 2020 - 1A - Dennis Wagner and Deborah Barfield Berry

Calvetta Williams, founder of Mothers Against Violence in Des Moines, Iowa, is all about
peaceful protest. She organized a march through the city Saturday that began and ended
without a hint of violence.

   
 

i _ A
Yet, one day earlier, as the 49-yearold watched people smash windows in a haze of tear
gas, she understood the frustration and rage that caused some to lash out. “I’m angry,
too,” Williams said. “I’m a black mother with two black sons, and I’m tired of using hash-
tags with the names of people murdered by police officers. ... We can’t just sit on the side-
lines anymore.”
Her words typified the complicated, conflicting reactions among activists, community
leaders and civil rights historians to the violence sparked by the death of George Floyd, an
unarmed, handcuffed black man who died in the custody of Minneapolis police.
On the one hand, violence sabotages a message of social justice. On the other,
“A building can be put back up. George Floyd, he can’t be put back home.”
Calvetta Williams, Mothers Against Violence
fury over Floyd’s death is understandable — and it could be effective in changing public
consciousness.
Over the past several days, some demonstrations across the USA have turned violent — re-
sulting in vandalism, looting, arson, tear gas and arrests.
Even after four officers involved in Floyd’s death were fired and one was charged with
third-degree murder and manslaughter, violence extended from D.C. to LA. President
Donald Trump vowed to “stop mob violence and stop it cold,” blaming “radical left-wing”
agitators.
A half-dozen states activated National Guard troops Saturday. Mayors imposed curfews.
Still, one overriding image on cable news Saturday was a burning police car.
Williams said she does not condone such conduct, but she recognizes violence is a state-
ment of community anger about police brutality. “I think it enhances the message” of de-

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200601/page/1/textview 114
2020. 6. 17. Activists worry violence distorts message

monstrations, she said. “How many times do we have to say our lives matter? ... A building
can be put back up. George Floyd, he can’t be put back home.”

In Minneapolis, Korey Dean Sr., 46, founder of the Man Up Club, which mentors young
black males, said he helped former NBA player Royce White organize a demonstration Fri-
day at U.S. Bank Stadium.

A group of pro basketball players and their friends, dressed in black, led a parade that
quickly swelled. Marchers knelt in silence at bridge crossings, prayed and delivered
speeches during a 3-mile walk that ended long before curfew. “We started with 300, and
we finished with 15,000 people,” Dean said. “Not one fight, incident or argument. That is
absolutely phenomenal.”

Dean said the event was a statement of unity against injustice — a manifesto that “police
brutality can no longer be tolerated in our city.”

Though the message of peace succeeded locally, he said, national news coverage focused
on looting, burning buildings and vandals. “But that’s only by a small population in the
Twin Cities, and in no way represents the people of goodwill who are out here,” Dean said.
‘Throwing tea ... is looting’

Michael G. Long, editor of “We the Resistance: Documenting a History of Nonviolent
Protest in the United States,” said mayhem is not an effective tool to achieve the goals of a
movement.

“Riots alienate sympathizers,” Long said. “They alienate the people who can affect pol-
icy.”

At the same time, he said, rioting is a way for the abused to defend themselves or to be no-
ticed. “The thing about violent protests is they get wider societal attention. It can be effec-
tive in raising public consciousness,” he said.

Long noted that Martin Luther King Jr. saw violence as “a cry of the oppressed” but de-
nounced it, in part because he believed a peaceful goal requires peaceful means.

Long said violence against injustice and abuse is a founding principle of the USA, starting
in the Revolutionary War. “Throwing tea into Boston Harbor is looting,” he said. “The U.S.
was formed in the crucible of violent protests.”

Though the historic impact of ongoing demonstrations remains to be seen, Long said,
“You can be sure after these protests — these peaceful violent protests — there will be re-
forms.”

Robin Kelley, a professor of history at UCLA, credited uprisings in approxiviewed mately
125 cities from 1964 to 1972 with more robust public oversight committees and the Kerner
Commission report in 1968, which found institutionalized racism was driving urban vio-
lence. “Reforms have been implemented ... in response to rebellion, in response to unrest,
in response to disruption,” he said.

Kelley said a victory to come out of more recent uprisings has been the new wave of district
attorneys elected in Philadelphia and Chicago who prosecute police officers more aggres-
sively. He noted that without past uprisings, it’s unlikely the four officers involved in
Floyd’s death would have been fired so swiftly, days after video of his final moments went
viral.

Violence plays into perception

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200601/page/1/textview 2/4
2020. 6. 17. Activists worry violence distorts message

Omar Wasow, an assistant professor of politics at Princeton University who focuses on
historic civil rights demonstrations, said violence plays a complex role in how events are
perceived.

During the early 1960s, Wasow said, civil rights leaders realized peaceful marches would
prompt a savage response from police that would be captured by news media. Those “pow-
erful narratives reflected the level of brutality in the Jim Crow South,” he said, forcing
changes in public opinion, voting and political action.

By the late 1960s, Wasow said, militant black activists had given up on peaceful demon-
strations. Protests in Los Angeles and other cities became more violent and were perceived
as riots rather than civil rights efforts. The result, Wasow said, was a shift in public con-
cern about crime and security, which was reflected in elections.

Wasow stressed that even when organizers develop a plan for peaceful demonstrations,
some participants may not buy into it. Police behavior and news coverage shape the out-
come, too.

Early in the Minneapolis demonstrations, Wasow said, law enforcement appeared to over-
react when confronted by nonviolent crowds. “It doesn’t take a lot of excessive force to
turn a peaceful protest into one where anger breaks out,” he said.

Rickey Hill, former chairman of the political science department at Mississippi’s Jackson
State University, said provocations and passions must be in the context of long-standing
mistrust between black communities and police.

Hill was arrested and expelled from Southern University in Louisiana in 1972 for helping
lead a campus protest over inadequate services and funding. Police shot and killed two stu-
dents.

“It’s really frustrating because some of us have faced these guns,” he said. “We have seen
people killed. Nothing has been done. So we get this constant sense that the tragedy always
turns to farce.

“When human beings get tired of being oppressed,” Hill said, “they have to, in fact, raise
and cry. They have to go guttural. They say, ‘I’m tired of this. We need a change.’ ”

Kristen Clarke, president and executive director of the Lawyers’ Committee for Civil Rights
Under Law, said the focus on violence is a “distraction, but only for those who refuse to
contend with the murder of George Floyd and Breonna Taylor.” (Taylor, 26, died after be-
ing shot eight times by police in Louisville, Kentucky, during a raid on her apartment.) For
others, she said, the “objective has remained squarely focused on the need for police re-
form, justice and accountability.”

Barbie Zelizer, a professor with the University of Pennsylvania’s Annenberg School for
Communication and director of the Center for Media at Risk, said news outlets struggle to
cover demonstrations evenhandedly.

“The media love spectacles,” she said. “And violence is spectacle.”

Though violence at protests against police brutality is newsworthy, Zelizer said, it should
not eclipse coverage of peaceful demonstrations, and it should be presented in context
with “the state violence against blacks.”

Some worry protests hijacked

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200601/page/1/textview 3/4
2020. 6. 17. Activists worry violence distorts message

Civil rights leaders suspect outsiders have infiltrated demonstrations to distract from the
focus on police brutality.

“It’s really dangerous for us to lose focus on the original tragedy at hand, and what we
need to do to move forward,” said Vanita Gupta, president of the Leadership Conference on
Civil and Human Rights.

Activists said law enforcement should investigate reports that outside agitators are trig-
gering violence at otherwise peaceful demonstrations.

“There are always people who are going to infiltrate,” said Melanie Campbell, president of
the National Coalition on Black Civic Participation.

Many demonstrations have been peaceful and led by people frustrated by long-standing
issues in black communities, Campbell said. She said Floyd’s death spurred them to take to
the streets even as the coronavirus has taken a disproportionate toll on African Americans.
“Black people are risking their lives protesting in the middle of a pandemic that’s killing
black folks. That’s real,” she said. “There is no convenient time to fight back.”

Derrick Johnson, president of the national NAACP, said he’s concerned “the violence is re-
ally suffocating the message.” He said activists work to encourage nonviolent demonstra-
tions.

“T understand the hurt. I understand the anger,” he said. “But the anger and hurt must be
directed to an outcome and not further divide where we are.”

It’s not over

Former Minneapolis police officer Derek Chauvin was arrested Friday on murder and man-
slaughter charges. Kon Johnson, a Minneapolis activist, said the arrest is a good first step
but a far cry from justice.

“T don’t want to burn down s--- either. I don’t. But guess what? It’s gonna happen if this
fool does not get life in jail,” he said.

Dismantling racism is the only way to quell unrest, Kelley said. He expects a sustained pe-
riod of struggle between those who believe people of color need to be vigorously policed
and those who believe their treatment by police is unacceptable.

“Every single time you walk out the door, you don’t even know if you’re going to come
back home,” he said. “You’re doing small little things, the hustle to make a life, to make a
living. You don’t even know you’re committing a crime. And at the end of the day, you
could be killed for that. Everybody knows that. And so the anger and the anguish just rose
up once again.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200601/page/1/textview 4/4
