2020. 6. 17. Memorial brings Americans together in mourning, outrage

Memorial brings Americans together in mourning, outrage

USA TODAY US Edition - 5 Jun 2020 - 1A: Marco della Cava

Atlanta, Bernice King, daughter of the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr., addressed 1,000 people,
many dressed in their Sunday finest, urging them not to stop “until there is never again
the breath taken out of the life of any black or brown person in this nation and around the
world.”

  

In Fall River, Massachusetts, protesters lay on their stomachs in the grass, hands together
behind their backs, replicating the position in which George Floyd was held before he died.
Members of the Fall River Police Department joined protesters in taking a knee.

In Brooklyn, Mayor Bill de Blasio and his wife, Chirlane McCray, along with city
comptroller Letitia James, joined Floyd’s brother, Terrance Floyd, at a memorial that drew
thousands. McCray and James drew loud responses by calling out “Say his name”

and waiting for response: “George

Floyd.”

And in Washington, D.C., a normally bustling plaza packed with protesters went silent for
eight minutes and 46 seconds, the amount of time Floyd spent under the knee of Officer
Derek Chauvin, who has been charged with second-degree murder. On Capitol Hill, Senate
Democrats took the same pause while on bended knee.

Across the nation Thursday, Americans stopped to commemorate the life and mourn the
death of Floyd, 46, at the hands of Minneapolis police, with Floyd’s dying words, “I can’t
breathe,” giving life to a searing moment in the nation’s fraught struggle for human
rights.

Artists have painted murals of his image on city streets. Protesters across the world have
yelled his name and demanded justice while facing off against police officers dressed in
riot gear.

The overwhelming chorus of outrage, fueled by what some say is an at times overly ag-
gressive response by law enforcement, have formed a reality few Americans have wit-
nessed before.

“We are at a tipping point, much as during the ’60s when Dr. Martin Luther King said we
are at a crossroads,” said Aaron Bryant, curator at the National Museum of African Ameri-
can History and Culture in Washington, D.C. “This moment is about the nation living up to
its promise and the guarantees we all are given under the Constitution.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200605/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. Memorial brings Americans together in mourning, outrage

On Thursday, the focus returned to the life Floyd led as he was memorialized by family and
friends at Minneapolis’ North Central University, an event included a “national eulogy” by
the Rev. Al Sharpton and a “national criminal justice system address” by Floyd family at-
torney Ben Crump.

The tributes will continue Saturday in Raeford, North Carolina, where Floyd was born and
where Floyd’s sister Bridgette lives. And on Monday and Tuesday, funeral services will take
place in Houston, where Floyd lived before he left for better employment options in Min-
neapolis. There will be both a public

and private viewing, and presumptive Democratic presidential nominee and former Vice
President Joe Biden has announced he will attend.

Much as the protests in the wake of Floyd’s death have erupted in cities across the country,
so, too, are his memorials echoing.

Hundreds of people lay on their stomachs across Second Avenue in Pittsburgh, some
silent, some chanting “Say his name,” and “This is what democracy looks like.”

In Las Vegas’ Kianga Isoke Palacio Park, roughly 150 people were expected at a Black Lives
Matter: Solidarity event.

In Chicago, thousands of people have expressed interest in Facebook events for at least two
community protests planned for Thursday night — on the city’s North and South Sides — to
demand police accountability and justice for Floyd.

In Dudley, Massachusetts, Abigail Cooper, 15, was planning a protest and meeting with
Webster Police Chief Michael Shaw to map out an event Saturday to recognize Floyd’s
death. She said she hopes Floyd’s memorial can bring some degree of closure.

“This is really the tip of the iceberg because this has happened so many times, and it was
recorded and got to the media really fast,” said Cooper, who is black and resides in a pre-
dominantly white community of close to 12,000 people.

In New Hampshire, Lovey Roundtree Oliff, the first African American woman elected to
Exeter’s Select Board, called the national memorial “a new beginning of sorts.” She said
she couldn’t help but think of the public outrage at San Francisco 49ers quarterback Colin
Kaepernick protesting police brutality by taking a knee during the national anthem in 2016
and how critics portrayed his message as anti-American.

“(A lot of the concerns and issues that people were feeling before, that in my opinion were
being ignored, are now being heard,” Roundtree Oliff said. “If the nation as a whole had
been listening more clearly in 2016, perhaps we wouldn’t be in the position we’ re in to-
day.”

While Floyd may have become a symbol in his death, he was remembered by those who
knew him as a “gentle giant,” said his friend Wallace White.

“He didn’t need to die like that. All the footage showed the man was not resisting him.

“He was loved by everyone around here. He was a real quiet guy, liked to have fun,” White
told USA TODAY.

As protests erupted after his death, details about Floyd’s life emerged: A solid basketball
player at 6-foot-4. A doting father to a young girl. A wellliked fixture as a security guard at
the Conga Latin Bistro.

Jovanni Thunstrom, Floyd’s employer, said his killing was “just plain murder.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200605/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. Memorial brings Americans together in mourning, outrage

“My employee George Floyd was murdered by a Police officer that had no compassion,
used his position to commit a murder of someone that was begging for his life,” wrote
Thunstrom, owner of the Conga Latin Bistro, in a Facebook post. “I will like to keep on
writing, but my vision is blurry, from the tears coming out of my eyes. I am sorry, I usually
don’t cry.”

Protesters have been moved by other recent examples of injustice, including the filmed
killing of Anmaud Arbery in Georgia, the shooting of paramedic Breonna Taylor by Ken-
tucky police officers, and a viral video from Central Park in New York City showing a white
woman threatening an African American man with police action after he asked her to leash
her dog as required by law so he could bird-watch in peace.

Janai Nelson, associate director and counsel at the NAACP Legal Defense Fund, said pro-
testers want to usher in societal changes in honor of Floyd.

“This is a multicultural movement that didn’t start as one, a moment that originated with
the birth of Black Lives Matter in 2014, when that statement was controversial,” said Nel-
son.

“Now in 2020, you see young white people holding up signs saying that you’d have never
seen that a mere five years ago,” she said.

“So in that way it’s hugely different. This death has galvanized a group of allies in a short
time.” Contributing: Kevin McCoy, Nicquel Terry Ellis, Grace Hauck of USA TODAY and
Brian Lee of the Telegram & Gazette, Wayne Miller of The Providence Journal, Chrissy Sut-
tles and Daveen Rae Kurutz of The Beaver County (Pennsylvania) Times

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200605/page/1/textview 3/3
