2020. 6. 17. Sorry, car buyers. You'll have to wait for ’21 models

Sorry, car buyers. You’ll have to wait for ’21 models
Plants shutting down, slower sales force debut delays

USA TODAY US Edition - 11 Jun 2020 - 1A: Nathan Bomey

 

=)
Usually around late summer, car dealerships begin trotting out the first batch of new mod-
els.

This year you’!l have to wait. With the coronavirus pandemic slamming the auto industry,
certain 2021 vehicles will arrive late as automakers have put the brakes on dozens of de-
buts.

““We’ve seen quite a few delays,” said Jeff Schuster, president of global vehicle forecasts
for research firm LMC Automotive.

While there’s yet to be a new model canceled publicly, at least 24 redesigned or new vehi-
cles that were poised to roll out in the coming months won’t come out on time, according
to

LMC Automotive, which provided a partial list to USA TODAY. They include the Ford F-150,
Cadillac Escalade and Acura MDX.

Though designers and engineers are largely able to work from home, plant shutdowns and
a sales slowdown have caused the delays.

Overall, automakers had planned to launch 38 redesigned or new 2021 model-year vehicles
in the 2020 calendar year. A vehicle is generally considered redesigned when its styling,
size, chassis, or powertrain have been substantially overhauled.

Of those 38, five have already launched, including the Tesla Model Y crossover, while 12
have been delayed within the year and 12 have been pushed into next year, according to
LMC.

And some are “still at risk to slip into next year,” Schuster said.

The highest-profile delay is for the highest- profile vehicle: the Ford F-150.

Part of the F-series lineup, which is the best-selling vehicle in America, the F-150 is
poised for a total redesign. But Ford is expected to delay the start of production from July
to September, according to LMC.

Getting the redone F-150 launched as soon as possible is extremely important for Ford’s
finances. But the two plants where the vehicle is assembled — one in Missouri and one in
Michigan — have each grappled with brief production stoppages due to positive

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/2020061 1/page/1/textview 1/2
2020. 6. 17. Sorry, car buyers. You'll have to wait for ’21 models

coronavirus tests among workers after they resumed operations following two-month
shutdowns.

“That’s a substantial launch in a good year and, when everything is normal, a challenging
one,” Schuster said.

Ford is also expected to delay the rollout of the highly anticipated return of the Ford
Bronco SUV, which was set to begin production in December but now won’t start until Fe-
bruary.

Other high-profile delays of production, according to LMC, include:

I Nissan Frontier: from April 2020

to April 2021.

1 Acura MDX: from May to October.

I Ford Mustang Mach-E: from July

to September.

I Toyota Sienna 500B: from July to

September.

I Cadillac Escalade: from July to August.

Cancellations are unlikely, if only because much of the investment in the redesign and
production setup has already been allocated.

“They were just too far along to cancel,” Schuster said.

Still, while automakers may not abandon redesigned or brand-new vehicles that were in
the works, they may decide to eliminate existing models that aren’t selling well to make
room for the newcomers amid a sluggish sales environment. They’ve been eliminating
poorly selling models in droves in recent years with the cancellation of vehicles like the
Chevrolet Cruze, Ford Focus and the Fiat 500.

“T do think there’s going to be further trimming of product lines,” said Michelle Krebs, an
analyst for car-buying site Autotrader.

As of late May, about 10% of vehicles on dealer lots were still 2019 models, according to car
research site Edmunds.

To be sure, dealers aren’t being flooded with vehicle inventory. Production shutdowns
during the height of COVID-19 have prevented that from happening.

But that means “there just won’t be as many 2020 model years out there” as there usually
would be for the current model year, Edmunds analyst Jessica Caldwell said.

Production shutdowns aren’t the only problem for the automakers. The cancellation of the
2020 Detroit auto show and the 2020 New York auto show, plus the inability to organize
solo publicity events, is making it difficult for automakers to generate buzz about
redesigned models.

For example, General Motors was supposed to debut the revived Hummer in May in a bid to
give the newly styled GMC-line electric pickup a big boost out of the gate. But that event
hasn’t happened.

“Automakers are struggling in terms of introducing their vehicles and how to create a
high-profile event to get attention,” Caldwell said. “You can’t just be producing vehicles
nobody knows about.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/2020061 1/page/1/textview 2/2
