2020. 6. 17. ‘Hurt my heart’

‘Hurt my heart’

Changes in her city led her to ‘lead with heart’

USA TODAY US Edition - 4 Jun 2020 - 1A - Uriel J. Garcia and Jessica Boehm The Arizona Republic USA TODAY NET-
WORK

 

PHOENIX — Like many police chiefs across the country, Phoenix Chief Jeri Williams has
denounced the death of George Floyd, the black man killed by a white police officer in Min-
neapolis, while at the same time she struggles to support her officers and maintain peace
in the midst of the resulting protests.

But Williams comes at the situation from a unique perspective.

She’s one of only a handful of black female police chiefs in the nation. And she’s a mother
with black sons.

She said she saw what happened through both lenses, but her conclusion was the same.
“It’s almost disbelief that you’re seeing what you’ re seeing. And then you’re yelling at the
screen or the monitor, ‘What are you doing? Get off of him!” she said. “It was unbeliev-
ably, disgustingly horrific. It hurt my heart.”

Unlike other acts of deadly force by police officers, this one has created a pivotal moment
in American history, Williams said in an interview with The Arizona Republic, part of the
USA TODAY Network. And she believes it could change the way police do their jobs.

“The level of voice that we’re seeing now is unlike anything that the world has ever seen,
especially in the United States of America,” Williams said.

Phoenix’s own history

Williams was appointed police chief in 2016, overseeing law enforcement in the nation’s
fifth-largest city. She was the first woman hired to do the job.

Her sons are 26 and 27. One, Alan Williams, is a professional basketball player and former
Phoenix Suns player.

She said she has talked with her sons about Floyd’s death.

“They were baffled and in disbelief,” she said. “It’s unreal and unbelievably disgusting.”
Chiefs before Williams have wrestled with high-profile police shootings. For example, the
killing in 2014 of a woman suffering from mental illness drew a massive outcry. And use of
force has been an issue for Williams since her first day on the job.

On the day of her swearing in, about 30 protesters carried white crosses and black coffins
during a demonstration against police brutality.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200604/page/1/textview 1/3
2020. 6. 17. ‘Hurt my heart’

The death of an individual during an interaction with police is something religious leaders,
activists and some city leaders have said has also occurred too many times in Phoenix —
both before Williams took over, and since.

For years, activists have decried the high rate of police shootings in Phoenix.

Williams said she recognizes that the anger from protesters in Phoenix also stems from
instances of fatal police shootings locally.

“Yes, people are angry. People are frustrated. People are beside themselves. People don’t
want the police department funded,” she said.

She said the Phoenix Police Department has adopted changes in its effort to be more trans-
parent, including outfitting officers with body cameras. But, she said, the department
can’t make policy changes on its own because her officers have to follow the law.

She said community members asking for change need to understand that there are rules
and processes that need to be followed in order to change any policy. She said people who
want changes need to contact their elected officials and tell them what they want.

“T’m not going to say what policies or rules I want changed. I really want to hear that from
the community,” Williams said. “I really want to see what the rub is for them so we can
work through the process of making whatever adjustments we need to while at the same
time making sure we’ re in the confines of the law, policy and procedure.”

Phoenix makes changes

It’s been a year since the case of Dravon Ames and his family made national news.

A white Phoenix officer, Christopher Meyer, who has since been fired, pointed a gun at
Ames, who is black, threatening to shoot him in front of his then-pregnant fiancee and
children.

As a result of this case and a record number of police shootings for the department in 2018,
Williams has implemented changes.

“We've changed our tactics,” she said. “We’ve changed our training. We’ve become more
transparent than this police department has ever been.”

For example, the department has started to collect data each time an officer points a
firearm at a person. Preliminary analysis of that data indicated those incidents have dis-
proportionately involved black people compared with their population in the city.

Phoenix police have begun publishing police shooting data on the department’s website
and releasing summary videos, including on-body camera footage, of police shootings.
‘Lead with heart’

These are all changes Williams said she welcomes and that help provide transparency. She
said she doesn’t mind the scrutiny.

“T’ve said this before on tape, and off tape, that the Phoenix Police Department isn’t afraid
to be observed by outsiders,” she said. “We welcome the opportunity to share and show
how amazing we are.”

She pointed to three police officers who took a knee along with protesters during the fifth
night of protests on Monday night, saying that sentiment reflects the beliefs of the major-
ity of the police department.

“We lead with heart,” she said. She said that protest ended peacefully. Tear gas and pepper
spray, she said, have been used “when we were met with a level of force where people are

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200604/page/1/textview 2/3
2020. 6. 17. ‘Hurt my heart’

throwing rocks, bottles, fireworks and things catch things on fire.”

Williams said she recognizes that moving forward, hard conversations need to happen be-
tween residents and police leadership.

“We are constantly engaged with our community. The path and the way forward is having

those conversations that are not comfortable, that are rough, that are challenging,” she
said. “But we have to listen to one another.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200604/page/1/textview 3/3
