2020. 6. 17. USA's meatpacking plants ideal virus breeding ground

USA’s meatpacking plants ideal virus breeding ground
Risky conditions have long plagued industry

USA TODAY US Edition - 26 May 2020 - 1A - Sky Chadde, Kyle Bagenstose, Veronica Martinez Jacobo and Rachel Axon

Maria cut chicken thighs shoulder to shoulder with co-workers who coughed and ran

  

A S | iB f i
The 33-year-old single mother from Mexico worked on a fast-paced line in one of Amer-
ica’s most dangerous industries. Meatpacking plants have long faced criticism for sacrific-
ing worker safety in the name of efficiency and cheap meat. Injuries are common. Severed
fingers. Chemical exposure. Back sprains.
But Maria, who asked to be identified only by her first name because of employment con-
cerns, feared something worse in mid-April at the Mountaire Farms poultry facility in Siler
City, North Carolina.
As the novel coronavirus invaded meatpacking plants across the nation,
infecting dozens — then hundreds, then thousands — of workers, Maria said she feared for
her life. Every time a colleague coughed, she said, she wondered if COVID-19 had found its
way to Mountaire.
She worried about getting sick and dying, leaving her kids without a mother. She said plant
supervisors wouldn’t talk about it. So she kept working.
By late April, the company confirmed at least 11 employees had tested positive for the
virus. One of them was a coworker, Maria said, who called her upset that she unwittingly
passed the virus to her father and he died.
The meatpacking industry has evolved into a marvel of modern efficiency, producing 105
billion pounds a year of poultry, pork, beef and lamb destined for dinner tables across
America and the world. That’s nearly double what it produced three decades ago.
But its evolution came at a cost. The same features that allow a steady churn of cheap meat
also provide the perfect breeding ground for diseases like the coronavirus: a cramped
workplace, a culture of underreporting illnesses, and a cadre of rural, immigrant and un-
documented workers who share transportation and close living quarters.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200526/page/1/textview 115
2020. 6. 17. USA's meatpacking plants ideal virus breeding ground

“This pandemic is preying on decades of the fundamental arrangement of how we produce
our food,” said Joshua Specht, an assistant professor of history at the University of Notre
Dame who studies the meat industry.

The meatpacking industry now faces perhaps its greatest test of worker safety as the novel
coronavirus sweeps through its slaughterhouses and processing plants. As of May 20, offi-
cials have publicly linked at least 15,300 COVID-19 infections to 192 meatpacking plants,
according to tracking by the Midwest Center for Investigative Reporting. At least 63 work-
ers have died.

In April, USA TODAY found that 1 in 3 of the nation’s 405 largest meatpacking plants oper-
ated in a county with a high rate of COVID-19 infections. This week, the data shows that
trend has expanded to more than half of those plants.

Companies including Tyson, Smithfield and JBS have implemented measures meant to re-
duce exposure, with many installing plastic sheeting between workers on the line, provid-
ing masks and face shields to employees and taking temperatures daily. Some have offered
more generous sick leave.

“It’s probably safer in these plants than it is in the communities,” said Shane Miller, se-
nior vice president and general manager of beef enterprise for Tyson Fresh Meats in an in-
terview with the Statesman, part of the USA TODAY Network.

Dozens of plants, including those owned by JBS and Tyson, have closed for days or weeks
to slow or stop the spread of the virus. But some say the measures are too little, too late in
an industry where worker safety has always been at risk.

Rantoul Foods’ pork plant outside Champaign, Illinois, took some of the same precautions
as Tyson, Smithfield and JBS and still succumbed to a coronavirus outbreak.

Prompted by complaints from plant workers, county health inspectors toured the Rantoul
plant in late April and found employees standing shoulder to shoulder with no barriers.
They crowded at sinks, which often lacked hot water. Many didn’t wear masks.

The plant, which at the time knew of just one COVID-19 case among its employees, re-
sponded by hiring one person per shift to ensure workers properly wore masks. It also ad-
justed people on the line to social-distance, set up break rooms outside and staggered
break times, according to an email a Rantoul executive sent to the health department. It
was not enough.

Since the inspection, at least 87 Rantoul workers have tested positive for COVID-19. That’s
nearly a quarter of the cases in Champaign County as of Wednesday, according to the
state’s health department.

With an outbreak in progress, the plant then reduced line speeds to half capacity, accord-
ing to a company statement. And Rantoul is “currently exploring the use of barriers
between line employees to be in place before we ramp production speeds back up to previ-
ous levels.”

Even with those measures, it’s impossible for workers to stay far enough apart, said Julie
Pryde, Champaign County’s health administrator.

Carpooling workers and crowded living conditions factored into the virus’s spread, Pryde
said. But so did the company’s labor practices: Without paid sick leave, workers who
brought in little money continued showing up, she said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200526/page/1/textview 2/5
2020. 6. 17. USA's meatpacking plants ideal virus breeding ground

“Someone brought it in,” she said. “With no infection control measures in place, it just
took off.”

Ahistory of poor conditions

The warning signs were there for decades.

Worker advocates and government watchdogs have long cited endemic problems that
thwart workplace safety. Among them: Workers are forced to slaughter and process ani-
mals at breakneck speeds. They get infrequent bathroom breaks. They crowd tight spaces.
They are discouraged from taking sick time. They lack protective gear.

Despite these red flags, the industry has continued to operate with little safety oversight.
Federal authorities say the Occupational Safety and Health Administration is in charge of
monitoring worker safety at meatpacking plants, but the agency has had a limited role.
Despite publicized coronavirus outbreaks in at least 192 plants, OSHA has inspected four
for COVID-19 safety violations, an agency spokesperson said. It has received 48 complaints
related to the coronavirus in meatpacking plants, the spokesperson said.

Even now, meatpacking companies are working with the federal government to stay open.
At least 46 plants have closed since the start of the pandemic, according to the Midwest
Center for Investigative Reporting. Some shut their doors for a day of deep cleaning. Others
halted operations for weeks.

The closures precipitated a drop in production, sparking fears of national meat shortages.
On April 28, President Donald Trump declared meat processing plants “critical infrastruc-
ture” and directed the U.S. Department of Agriculture to work with companies to keep
them open.

The move met swift backlash from unions and labor advocates.

“Using executive power to force people back on the job without proper protections is
wrong and dangerous,” tweeted Richard Trumka, president of the AFL-CIO.

Specht predicted in April that the industry would choose production over worker safety. “I
suspected workers were going to be sacrificed to keep people eating their meat,” he said,
“and that’s exactly how it played out.”

Essential, ‘also expendable’

Like meatpackers across the country, Maria in Siler City said she faced a choice: Risk her
life for a job that pays the bills or quit to protect her children.

Catherine Bassett, spokeswoman for the Mountaire Farm plant where Maria worked, said
that the company installed physical barriers between workers “by early April” and that
masks were mandatory “before the CDC required it.”

But Maria quit on April 26, the day she said she learned of Mountaire’s COVID-19 infec-
tions.

“For two weeks, I didn’t hold my daughter,” she said. “She would follow me and I felt very
bad, but I told my two other kids to take care of her, play with her and keep her busy. I
didn’t know if I had the virus.”

Even though she’s low on money, she said she won’t return to the line. “We may be essen-
tial, but we’re also expendable. If I get infected and I don’t go to work, the factory is not
going to stop.”

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200526/page/1/textview 3/5
2020. 6. 17. USA's meatpacking plants ideal virus breeding ground

Meatpackers haven’t always been expendable, low-wage employees, said Roger Horowitz,
a professor at the University of Delaware who studies the industry’s history.

In 1950, the average meatpacking worker earned about $34,400 a year in today’s dollars,
and providing paid sick leave was the industry norm, according to a Department of Labor
study. Today, the average worker earns $29,600 with no paid sick leave.

By the 1950s, the industry appeared to have moved beyond the horrors described in Upton
Sinclair’s classic “The Jungle.” The 1906 novel shocked Americans with its depiction of
how meatpacking plants exploited low-paid immigrants by exposing them to harsh condi-
tions at barely livable wages.

But companies soon began moving plants to rural areas nearer to feedlots and farms and
with less union control. At the same time, meat got cheaper. Beef prices dropped about 30
cents a pound from 1970, adjusted for inflation, according to USDA data. Pork prices fell
about 65 cents a pound. Since 1980, chicken prices decreased about 45 cents a pound.
Companies benefited from technological advancements to build larger, more specialized
plants to profit on economies of scale. To staff them, companies sought laborers who were
willing to work for cheap and live in rural areas, according to a USDA study.

The industry returned to its reliance on immigrant labor, Horowitz said. More than a quar-
ter of all meat and poultry workers were foreign-born noncitizens in 2015, according to a
Government Accountability Office report.

Those who are undocumented can’t buy health coverage or legally drive. Many live in
multigenerational households, meaning the crowded conditions at work continue when
they return home, according to a report this month by the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention.

Amplifying the problem, experts said, is that meatpackers feel pressured to work even
when sick, a problem the CDC cited in its report this month on outbreaks in meatpacking
plants.

Before quitting, Maria said, she’d swallow “a bunch of pills and try to do the job because
there was no other option.”

To keep their jobs, workers know they have to keep showing up.

“You can’t be the squeaky wheel in the assembly line,” said Carrie HenningSmith of the
Rural Health Research Center in Minnesota. “It doesn’t leave you with much power and
control.”

Workers and employers alike in the meatpacking industry may underreport injuries and
illnesses, according to a 2016 U.S. Government Accountability Office report. For the
worker, it’s from fear of job loss, the report said. For the employer, it’s from fear of the
potential costs associated with those injuries and illnesses.

The coronavirus has infiltrated plants with little room for social distancing. The lines in
meatpacking plants are crowded because carcass cutting can’t be automated with ma-
chines. It requires humans to break down an animal into meat for the dinner table, pre-
cisely cutting carcasses of various sizes into thighs, breasts, loins and steaks.

Amid the pandemic, meatpacking companies are installing plastic barriers between pro-
duction line workers and requiring employees to wear masks.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200526/page/1/textview 4/5
2020. 6. 17. USA's meatpacking plants ideal virus breeding ground

But that wasn’t enough at a Tyson plant in Rock Island County, Illinois, where health offi-
cials on April 23 found the partitions did not prevent contaminated air from “circulating
within a worker’s breathing zone.”

Inspectors recommended that Tyson extend the barriers, and the company says it did.
Inspectors also recommended installing a system that filters air through ultraviolet light
to kill the virus. That system was installed this past weekend in some high-traffic areas
such as the locker room, said Ashley LaCroix, a Tyson Foods spokeswoman.

Tough choices for workers

Even with the plant modifications, too many meatpackers know someone who has fallen ill
from coronavirus or someone who has died from it. That they, too, will be infected seems
less like an “if ” and more like a “when.”

Plant workers who once feared they would lose their jobs if they took a day off now fear
going to work at all. Many have stopped showing up.

Tyson plants in Arkansas increased the speeds of their production lines because fewer
workers are showing up, said Magaly Licolli, the founder of Vencemeros, an organization
that advocates for poultry plant employees.

One worker she spoke with said his supervisors told him the line had to go faster because
America faced a crisis: meat shortages.

‘(We are aware of no instance where line speed were increased due to higher absenteeism
in our facilities in Arkansas,” said Tyson’s LaCroix. “The safety of our team members
comes first and have slowed down our line speed in several locations based on availability
of team members and to allow for proper social distancing.”

As fewer workers show up, Licolli said, “workers are often going from one department to
the other.” And that can spread the coronavirus.

One worker at a Tyson plant in Rogers, Arkansas, said managers moved him onto a line
with a man who’d tested positive.

“T told the human resource assistant I wasn’t comfortable and I didn’t feel safe in that
line,” said the worker, who asked to remain anonymous to protect his livelihood.

He wanted to go home but was told he’d lose a point, which could lead to his firing, he said.
In mid-April, he took a week off, forgoing his $450 check.

Despite many missing workers, production has remained the same, he said. Managers find
workers around the plant and set them to cutting, he said.

The company provides masks and checks temperatures, but he still doesn’t feel safe. Peo-
ple congregate at entrances when they clock in and scramble to find coats that people from
the previous shift wore, he said.

“They don’t value us at all,” he said.

https:/Avww.pressreader.com/usa/usa-today-us-edition/20200526/page/1/textview 5/5
