Former Justice official Rod J. Rosenstein voiced second thoughts on a Russia probe decision.
Former deputy attorney general Rod J. Rosenstein conceded Wednesday that, in hindsight, he would not have signed an application to continue monitoring a former Trump campaign adviser during the FBI’S investigation into Russian interference in the 2016 election, and claimed he did not know of the significant problems that have since been identified with it.
The comment came at a Senate Judiciary Committee hearing to examine the Russia probe, including flaws in applications to monitor former Trump campaign adviser Carter Page.
The Justice Department inspector general found numerous errors and omissions in the applications, and the department has told a court it now believes it had “insufficient predication” to continue the surveillance.
Sen. Lindsey O. Graham (R-S.C.), a staunch ally of President Trump, asked Rosenstein, who signed one of the problematic applications, if — given what he knows now — he would have approved it.
“No, I would not,” Rosenstein responded.
Conservatives are likely to seize on the admission, and others from Rosenstein, as more ammunition for their attacks on the Russia investigation.
Rosenstein offered some defense of steps he took in the took in the case — particularly his appointment of Robert S. Mueller ITI as special counsel to lead it — but at times he was conciliatory toward Republicans skeptical of the investigation.
After Graham asked if Rosenstein would agree there was ultimately “no there there” to support the “concept that the campaign was colluding with the Russians in August 2017,” Rosenstein responded, “I agree with that general statement.” In that month, Rosenstein wrote a memo detailing the scope of Mueller’s investigation; the probe was far from over.
But Rosenstein seemed to stress at other points that his conclusion about the lack of a conspiracy between the Trump campaign and Russia came only in hindsight.
He noted, for example, that he “understood there was predication to investigate” when he wrote his scope memo, and added, “We investigate people who are not necessarily guilty, and so I didn’t have any presumption that these folks were guilty of anything.”
Rosenstein said of the Russia case, “I do not believe the investigation was a hoax” — which seemed to directly rebut a talking point of Trump’s.
But soon after, Rosenstein said he could not “vouch for the allegations.”
“As we now know, the eventual conclusions were that Russians committed crimes seeking to influence the election and Americans did not conspire with them,” he said.
Mueller’s report detailing his findings concluded there was not evidence to allege a conspiracy but that the Trump campaign “expected it would benefit electorally from information stolen and released through Russian efforts.”
Rosenstein said “appointing a special counsel was the best way to complete the investigation appropriately and to promote public confidence in its conclusions.”
“T still believe it was the right decision, under the circumstances,” he said.
He added later, “T do not believe that Mr. Mueller was trying to get rid of the president.”
Rosenstein is the first of potentially dozens of witnesses in an effort by Graham to investigate the investigation that upended Trump’s presidency and resulted in criminal convictions for several of his associates and campaign aides.
Democrats have bristled at the probe, suggesting the Russia case already has been aggressively scrutinized by the Justice Department’s internal watchdog and that Republicans seem to be trying to undercut the legitimate work Mueller did because they want to please Trump and help his reelection campaign.
The Justice Department inspector general last year lambasted the FBI for its handling of the warrant to monitor Page, though he said information had been kept from Rosenstein and other high-level officials before the warrant application was approved.
Rosenstein said he did not know of many of the problems, including that an FBI lawyer doctored a document used as part of the process.
Some Republican lawmakers took aim at Rosenstein, suggesting he did not do enough to ensure the accuracy of the application he signed.
Rosenstein conceded he was not sure he had “read every page.” White House press secretary Kayleigh Mcenany seized on that at a briefing Wednesday, saying, “It’s really astonishing to hear from him that he’s not sure he read every page of that warrant, but I suppose it’s encouraging to hear with his 20/20 hindsight that he wouldn’t have signed off on it.”
In a heated exchange with Sen. Josh Hawley (R-MO.
), Rosenstein accepted responsibility but suggested the lawmaker should focus on future fixes.
“T am accountable for it, but the question is, why did it happen?” Rosenstein said, adding later, “Yelling at me is not going to solve the problem.”
Rosenstein was far more guarded in addressing another controversy that he was questioned about: the Justice Department’s recent move to try to drop the criminal case against former Trump national security adviser Michael T. Flynn.
Flynn pleaded guilty in 2017 to lying to the FBI about conversations he had with a Russian diplomat but later changed defense teams and sought to undo the case.
Attorney General William P. Barr tapped U.S. Attorney Jeff Jensen in St. Louis to look into the matter, and Jensen ultimately uncovered FBI notes, which Flynn’s defense team has alleged show Flynn was entrapped.
At Jensen’s recommendation, Barr decided FBI agents did not have a good reason to interview Flynn in the first place, and thus his lies were not “material” to any case — a requirement to substantiate the charge to which he admitted.
Rosenstein, who was nominated by Trump to be deputy attorney general and confirmed in April 2017, was not leading the investigation when the FBI spoke to Flynn.
But he was supervising the matter when Flynn later pleaded guilty and agreed to cooperate with Mueller’s investigation.
Sen. Charles E. Grassley (R-IOwa) confronted Rosenstein about the matter, saying that at a June 2018 meeting the two had, Rosenstein refused to turn over case-related documents.
“It’s clear you were misleading me, Congress and the American people when you suggested we should be satisfied with Flynn’s plea agreement,” Grassley said.
Rosenstein responded that he was only reluctant to turn over materials because of the Justice Department’s long-standing policy of not giving lawmakers access to such documents
in a case that is pending in court.
Rosenstein said he approved the case against Flynn because “the evidence demonstrated his guilt, and he and his attorneys admitted his guilt.” He said much of what has been revealed recently was “news to me.”
“T obviously didn’t know there was exculpatory evidence,” he said.
Many legal analysts have disputed that the new evidence exonerates Flynn.
Rosenstein also took aim at former acting FBI director Andrew Mccabe, alleging Mccabe was “not fully candid with me” in the early days of his leading the bureau and the Russia case in May 2017.
Mccabe, Rosenstein said, did not for at least a week turn over memos from James B. Comey — whom Trump had just fired as FBI director — documenting what Comey saw as troubling interactions with the president.
In a statement Wednesday, McCabe said Rosenstein’s testimony “looks to be yet another sad attempt by the President & his men to rewrite the history of their actions in 2017” and noted he had briefed Rosenstein on Comey’s memos days after Comey was fired.
