Protests spread across U.S.
Anger reaches Dallas with police HQ demonstration Violent clashes with police erupt in Atlanta, other cities Fired officer charged with murder in black man’s death
The Dallas Morning News - 30 May 2020 - 1A - FROM WIRE REPORTS
Officials around nation plead for calm: ‘The world is watching’
MINNEAPOLIS — The white Minneapolis police officer who pressed his knee into George Floyd’s neck was arrested Friday and charged with murder, as authorities imposed overnight curfews to try to stem violent protests over police killings of African Americans that have spread from Minneapolis to other U.S. cities.
In Atlanta, protesters smashed windows at CNN headquarters, set a police car on fire and struck officers with bottles.
Large protests in New York, Houston and other cities were largely peaceful.
In Minneapolis, thousands marched downtown as the city’s 8 p.m. curfew passed and encircled a police precinct station.
“Prosecute the police!” some chanted, and “Say his name: George Floyd!” There had been no violence, but some protesters sprayed graffiti on buildings.
Elsewhere in the city, forces fired tear gas and rubber bullets to drive back protesters.
It wasn’t clear if — or how — authorities would enforce the curfew, amid sharp questions about city and state leaders’
handling of the crisis.
The curfew came one night after protesters burned a police precinct station, and barriers were erected around at least two police precinct buildings before
Derek Chauvin, 44, was charged with thirddegree murder and seconddegree manslaughter.
He also was accused of ignoring another officer who expressed concerns about Floyd as he lay handcuffed on the ground, pleading that he could not breathe, while Chauvin pressed his knee into his neck.
Floyd, who was black, had been arrested on suspicion of using a counterfeit bill at a store.
Chauvin, who was fired along with three other officers who were at the scene, faces more than 12 years in prison if convicted of murder.
An attorney for Floyd’s family welcomed the arrest but said he had expected a more serious murder charge and wanted the other officers arrested.
Prosecutor Mike Freeman said that more charges were possible but that for now, authori ties “felt it appropriate to focus on the most dangerous perpetrator.”
Minneapolis Mayor Jacob Frey declared the curfew for 8 p.m. Friday to 6 a.m. Saturday, with exceptions for emergency responders, homeless people and those seeking medical care.
“T know that whatever hope you feel today is tempered with skepticism and a righteous outrage,” Frey said in a statement.
“Today’s decision from the County Attorney is an essential first step on a longer road toward justice and healing our city.”
Protests also spread across the U.S., fueled by outrage over Floyd’s death and years of police violence against African Americans.
Demonstrators clashed with officers in New York and blocked traffic in Houston and San Jose, Calif.
News of the arrest came moments after Minnesota Gov.
Tim Walz acknowledged the “abject failure” of the response to the protests so far and called for swift justice.
Walz said the state had taken over the response to the violence and that it was time to show respect and dignity to those who are suffering.
“Minneapolis and St. Paul are on fire.
The fire is still smoldering in our streets.
The ashes are symbolic of decades and generations of pain, of anguish unheard,” Walz said.
“Now generations of pain is manifesting itself in front of the world — and the world is watching.”
President Donald Trump threatened action, tweeting after Thursday night’s rioting that “when the looting starts, the shooting starts.” That prompted a warning from Twitter for “glorifying violence.” Trump later said he had been referring to shooting that happened during the protests.
Atlanta violence
Demonstrators marched, stopped traffic and in some cases lashed out violently at police as protests erupted Friday in dozens of U.S. cities.
Protesters carried signs that said: “He said I can’t breathe.
Justice for George.”
After hours of peaceful protest in downtown Atlanta, some demonstrators suddenly turned violent, smashing police cars, setting one on fire, spraypainting the iconic logo sign at CNN headquarters, and breaking into a restaurant.
The crowd pelted officers with bottles, chanting “Quit your jobs.”
At least three officers were hurt and there were multiple arrests, police spokesman Carlos Campos said in an emailed statement.
Campos said protesters shot BB guns at officers and
threw bricks, bottles and knives at them.
People watched the scene from rooftops, some laughing as skirmishes broke out.
Demonstrators ignored police demands to disperse.
Some protesters moved to the city’s major interstate thoroughfare to try to block traffic.
Mayor Keisha Lance Bottoms passionately addressed the protesters at a news conference: “This is not a protest.
This is not in the spirit of Martin Luther King Jr.”
“You are disgracing our city,” she told protesters.
“You are disgracing the life of George Floyd and every other person who has been killed in this country.
We are better than this.
We are better than this as a city.
We are better than this as a country.
Go home, go home.” Bottoms was flanked by the rappers T.I.
and Killer Mike, as well as King’s daughter, Bernice King.
Killer Mike cried as he spoke.
Marchers moved through downtown Los Angeles and into the Staples Center area earlier in the evening, chanting, “I can’t breathe” and “No justice, no peace.” Then some members of the group went onto an Interstate 110 onramp and blocked northbound traffic, waving signs and chanting at stopped motorists.
Video from KTLATV showed police officers clashing with some protesters who allegedly vandalized a patrol car.
An LAPD spokesman confirmed that one officer was injured in a scuffle near Pershing Square and was receiving medical treatment.
In New York City, where police said more than 70 arrests or summonses were made during Thursday night protests and where video captured more arrests Friday, hundreds gathered in and around Foley Square as the mother of Eric Garner addressed the crowd.
Garner, a black man, died in a 2014 struggle with police after repeatedly crying out, “I can’t breathe.”
“They have to stop coming into our neighborhoods and brutalizing, terrorizing, murdering,” Gwen Carr said.
“It just keeps happening over and over again.
We can’t do this anymore.
...We have to take a stand.”
In Brooklyn, crowds of demonstrators chanted at police officers lined up outside the Barclays Center.
There were several moments of struggle, as some in the crowd pushed against metal barricades and police pushed back.
Scores of water bottles flew from the crowd toward the officers, and in return police twice sprayed an eyeirritating chemical at the group.
“It’s my duty to be out here,” said Brianna Petrisko, among those at Foley Square in lower Manhattan, where most were wearing masks amid the coronavirus pandemic.
“Our country has a sickness.
We have to be out here.
This is the only way we’re going to be heard.”
In Houston, where George Floyd grew up, several thousand people rallied in front of City Hall.
Police had apparently taken into custody a woman who had a rifle and had tried to use it to incite the crowd.
Gunfire broke out in multiple cities, including Louisville, where police said seven people were wounded in a shooting that sent dozens scattering.
Several hundred people there were protesting the March fatal police shooting of Breonna Taylor in her apartment, which police entered while she was asleep.
Shots also were fired near a crowd in Denver on Thursday evening, but a police spokesman said no one was injured.
Late into the night, officials pleaded with protesters to remain peaceful.
“I certainly understand everyone’s frustration and sense of pain and disgust following the murder of George Floyd in Minneapolis,” Denver Mayor Michael Hancock, a Democrat, said in a video message.
“But I want to plead to everyone, let’s demonstrate, but let’s demonstrate peacefully.”
In Detroit, hundreds of people congregated outside police headquarters Friday afternoon, chanting “black lives matter” as officers handed out masks.
In the nation’s capital, demonstrators gathered in a District of Columbia neighborhood and began a march to the White House.
‘Sound of justice’
In Minneapolis on Friday afternoon, a small group of protesters stopped to hear Korey Dean, 46, founder of the Man Up Club in Roseville, Minn., deliver a mini sermon.
“What you see is people coming together, unified under one solidarity of justice.
And we will make sure we receive justice,” Dean said.
“Yes, we’re angry, and there’s nothing wrong with being angry.
You cannot suppress a people and not expect a reaction.
But now they have a voice, and it’s the sound of justice.”
A peaceful crowd of several hundred also made their way to the Cup Foods store where Floyd died on Monday.
‘Welcome but overdue’
Attorney Benjamin Crump, who is representing Floyd’s family, said Chauvin’s arrest was “a welcome but overdue step on the road to justice.”
Crump had earlier called for an independent investigation, and said he asked to take custody of Floyd’s body to have an independent autopsy performed.
Floyd said that talk of a heart condition or asthma was irrelevant because Floyd was walking and breathing before his contact with police.
The doctor who will do the autopsy is Michael Baden, former chief medical examiner of New York City, who was hired to do an autopsy for Eric Garner as well.
On Thursday, the city released a transcript of the 911 call that brought police to the grocery store where Floyd was arrested.
The caller said someone paid with a counterfeit bill and described the man as “awfully drunk” and “not in control of himself.”
Asked by the 911 operator whether the man was “under the influence of something,” the caller said: “Something like that, yes.
He is not acting right.” Police said Floyd matched the caller’s description of the suspect.
Police were trying to put Floyd in a squad car on suspicion of passing a counterfeit $20 bill when he stiffened up and fell to the ground, saying he was claustrophobic.
Chauvin and Officer Tou Thoa arrived to help and tried several times to get Floyd into the car, but he struggled, the complaint said.
At one point, Chauvin pulled Floyd out of the passenger side of the car, and Floyd, who was handcuffed, went to the ground face down.
Officer J.K. Kueng held Floyd’s back and Lane
held his legs, while Chauvin put his knee on Floyd’s head and neck area, the complaint said.
Officer Thomas Lane asked, “Should we roll him on his side?” Chauvin said, “No, staying put is where we got him.” Lane said he was “worried about excited delirium or whatever,” and Chauvin said, “That’s why we have him on his stomach,” according to the complaint.
After Floyd apparently stopped breathing, Lane said again that he wanted to roll Chauvin onto his side.
Kueng checked for a wrist pulse and said he could not find one, the complaint said.
In all, Chauvin had his knee on Floyd’s neck for 8 minutes, 46 seconds, including nearly three minutes after Floyd stopped moving and talking, according to the complaint.
Chauvin’s attorney had no comment.
