Texas A&M makes initial plans to reopen its 11 colleges this fall.
The university’s initial intention is getting all 11 of its campuses back to school in August
Texas A&M University System’s board of regents and Chancellor John Sharp announced initial plans to reopen the system’s 11 colleges this fall with social distancing, contact tracing, and classes both in-person and online.
During a Friday morning board meeting, Sharp said the university has made “a series of decisions, which just a few months ago we couldn’t have imagined.” Like other colleges around the country, the COVID-19 pandemic forced schools to close campuses and resume classes online, but Sharp says that won’t be the case for long, at least not completely.
“It’s possible to educate someone online ... however it is the campus experience that brings the camaraderie,” Sharp said.
“You can get a degree online pretty easy, but it’s very hard to become an Aggie online.”
Officials said that although practices will be adjusted to suit individual campuses, the approaches — with strict sanitation and health standards — will be the same.
James Hallmark, the system’s vice chancellor for academic affairs, said while face-to-face classes will resume, all classes may not be offered in-person.
The system is considering various formats, including a hybrid one where students can attend classes in-person and online at different periods.
A&M officials are prioritizing which classes need to be held in person.
All courses will, however, be designed so they can be held remotely from the start to reduce disruption should the need for total remote learning return.
Hallmark said Texas A&M officials are also discussing expanding the instructional day or week, and possibly adjusting the academic calendar to start and end the semester before the Thanksgiving holiday.
Residence halls are expected to operate relatively normal, but students will be encouraged not to leave the university community and to report any exposure.
The resumption of athletics will depend on guidelines from health officials and sports conferences.
A decision on whether personal protective equipment may be required or recommended will be decided by the individual universities no later than July 31, according to the board’s agenda briefing.
Those accommodations will also determine what the different colleges are able to do dayto day.
The A&M system includes the flagship in College Station, a campus in San Antonio and Prairie View A&M University.
Testing will be available for faculty, staff and students who show symptoms.
Other Texas colleges have already announced initial plans for fall.
Rice University plans to reopen with classes that held simultaneously in-person and online, with flexible start
dates for international students, and a shortened fall semester that ends before Thanksgiving.
The University of Texas at Austin will also offer a shortened semester and ramped up testing on campus, but officials are still working on how classes will operate.
