Ratcliffe sworn in as intel chief
Texan faces decision on whether to release documents on Flynn
ter: @toddgillman
John Ratcliffe, a former federal prosecutor and a Texas congressman, was sworn in on Tuesday as the director of national intelligence.
WASHINGTON — John Ratcliffe, a former federal prosecutor and, for less than six years, a Texas congressman, was sworn in on Tuesday as the director of national intelligence.
The 54yearold Ratcliffe is now in charge of 17 spy agencies, including the CIA and National Security Agency, and serves as President Donald Trump’s top intelligence adviser.
“Confronted with a diverse and challenging global threat landscape, my highest priority as Director of National Intelligence is to provide timely, accurate, and objective intelligence to inform the President and policymakers, and ultimately to keep all Americans safe,” he said in a written statement.
“I look forward to leading this team of the world’s most talented and effective intelligence professionals with the highest standards of public service and with fidelity to the Constitution and the rule of law.”
Among his first decisions will be whether to publicly release documents related to investigations of Michael Flynn, who resigned after just one month as Trump’s national security adviser.
Flynn later pleaded guilty to lying to the FBI about contacts with Russian officials before Trump took office, but recently has claimed that he was entrapped.
The Justice Department took the extraordinary step of supporting Flynn’s bid to revoke the guilty plea.
The trial judge has resisted and the case is on appeal.
Shortly before Ratcliffe took over, acting DNI Richard Grenell declassified transcripts of phone calls between Flynn and thenrussian Ambassador Sergey Kislyak in December 2016, between Trump’s election and inauguration.
House Intelligence Committee Chairman Adam Schiff, DCalif., the chief prosecutor at Trump’s impeachment trial, had asked him to declassify those files.
Trump first tried to install Ratcliffe as DNI last July.
But a bipartisan chorus of senators complained that he lacked sufficient experience in intelligence.
Democrats also viewed him as too partisan and too loyal to Trump, after he’d caught the president’s eye with fierce questioning of special counsel Robert Mueller.
Ratcliffe pulled out within a week.
Seven months later, emboldened by his acquittal in the Senate, Trump tried again.
This time Ratcliffe sailed through the confirmation process, albeit against unified Democratic opposition.
The Senate confirmed him last Thursday 4944.
He served as a vocal defender of Trump at House impeachment hearings and as a spokesman for the president’s defense team during the trial.
During the confirmation process he sought to assure senators that he would set aside partisan considerations and his relationship with the president, to provide only unbiased advice.
Ratcliffe has never worked in the nation’s intelligence community.
He did some counterterrorism work as a federal prosecutor, which included a stint as U.S. attorney for the Eastern District of Texas under President George W. Bush.
During that time he also served as mayor of Heath, a small city in Rockwall County.
In 2014, he ousted 91yearold Rep. Ralph Hall in the GOP primary, easily winning reelection twice.
The seat will remain vacant until January.
GOP county and precinct leaders in the district will meet Aug. 8 to pick a new GOP nominee for the November ballot.
Ratcliffe resigned on Friday after his confirmation.
“As DNI, I will remain dedicated to supporting and defending the indispensable work of Intelligence Community patriots, which remains vital to this nation’s security and prosperity.
I would like to thank President Trump for trusting me with this solemn duty and to express my appreciation to Richard Grenell for serving well in an acting capacity these last three months,” he said.
