A strong jobs report may hurt prospects for another coronavirus aid bill.
Citing an emergency, he waives protections for consumers, workers
The Dallas Morning News - 7 Jun 2020 - 1A
WASHINGTON — The Trump administration is doing by fiat what it has struggled to accomplish through lengthy rulemaking: dismantle federal regulations designed to protect workers, consumers, investors and the environment.
Invoking an economic emergency stemming from the coronavirus pandemic, the administration has made it harder for people to challenge inaccuracies on credit reports, eased required breaks for commercial truckers, and told factories and power plants that they should obey pollution limits but don’t have to monitor or report their emissions routinely, among other things.
President Donald Trump formalized this strategy two weeks ago when he signed an executive order instructing agencies across the government to rescind, modify or simply stop enforcing regulations if they burden the economy.
On Thursday, he signed another order to allow agencies to waive 50yearold environmental laws to speed federal approvals of pipelines, highways and other projects.
The president took the actions even as he celebrated a 13.3% unemployment rate Friday and said the economy was surging in “the greatest comeback in American history.”
His executive orders have resurrected a longrunning debate about whether regulation hurts the economy.
“This is a huge win for progrowth policies,” said David McIntosh, president of the Club for Growth, in a recent call with reporters.
The moves come on top of waivers that federal agencies had already granted businesses and industries earlier in the health crisis.
The White House will seek to make many of those roughly 600 deregulatory actions permanent, according to a former White House official, speaking on the condition of anonymity to talk frankly.
As the virus spread across the United States earlier this year and the economy cratered, officials looked for places to pare back.
The federal consumer watchdog agency suspended requirements that financial institutions investigate disputed information on consumers’ credit reports.
The Department of Labor relaxed some worker protections, including how businesses report paid sick leave.
The Food and Drug Administration cut the time it takes to approve new antimicrobial products from years to months.
Major conservative groups and trade associations, which decry many federal regulations as overreach, are rushing to present more ideas.
These include setting aside labor requirements on infrastructure projects; speeding up vaccine and treatment approvals; limiting corporate liability; lifting restrictions on telemedicine so people can see doctors across state lines; and loosening wetlands protections so farmers can install stocked fish ponds or other features.
But others say that the president is overstepping his authority, and that the executive orders will collapse in the face of legal challenges.
“The good news is that the president has once again assumed he possesses absolute power to say what the law is, but he does not,” Richard Lazarus, a Harvard University professor of environmental law, said in an email.
“That is the job of the courts, and they will reject the president’s effort to sweep away critically important public health protections enacted by Congress and signed by prior Republican and Democratic presidents.”
Still, even if interest groups battle rollbacks in court, federal officials could just stop enforcing some regulations, said New York University School of Law professor Richard Revesz.
“Agencies have a fair amount of discretion of when to bring enforcement actions,” he said.
When — and if — the administration reverts to established regulatory enforcement depends on the economy, but not that alone.
Restoring regulations “needs to be timed so that they don’t stop the recovery with lot of costs and regulations,” McIntosh said.
“What we’ve urged the administration to do is use that end phase to evaluate whether these regulations are really needed.”
“This is a huge win for progrowth policies.”
David McIntosh, president of the Club for Growth
