Dems meeting online
Online convention oozes optimism about ousting Trump, taking state House
Texas Democrats convene online convention.
After spending more than two decades trying to claw back to power, Texas Democrats hope 2020 is the year their rebuilding project transforms into groundbreaking victories.
Party leaders are aiming high.
The biggest prize in the November general elections is beating Donald Trump in Texas, a feat that would block the GOP’S path to the White House.
Democrats also hope to unseat longtime Republican Sen. John Cornyn while winning congressional contests across the state —including in North Texas.
Perhaps the most pressing challenge for Democrats is netting the nine seats needed to seize control of the Texas House.
This week, Texas Democrats convened their state convention, the largest pep rally of its kind in the nation.
The online confab features former Vice President Joe Biden, the likely Democratic nominee for president, as well as U.S. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi.
The convention started Monday and ends Saturday.
“Because of your hard work, this
is the year Texas turns blue,” state Democratic Party Chairman Gilberto Hinojosa told delegates via video.
“Because of your hard work, this is the year we save our great state, and in return save the entire nation.
“We are ready for November,” he said.
“Let’s take the Texas House.
Let’s send more Democrats to Congress.
Let’s take out John Cornyn.
Let’s elect a Democratic president.
Let’s turn Texas blue.”
Conventions are designed to energize base voters and motivate staffers and volunteers for the hard work ahead, and Hinojosa’s remarks would have been met with loud applause if he made them in front of delegates on a convention floor.
But since the coronavirus pandemic made it impractical for the party to have an inperson convention, Democrats have to make do with a format that lacks the usual fire and fanfare.
Still, Texas Democratic Party executive director Manny Garcia said that on Monday 100,000 people watched the convention on Facebook alone.
“Our online convention is already a massive success and we are just getting started,” he said.
“Our grassroots excitement is breaking records.”
Republicans are not impressed.
A spokesman for Trump’s presidential campaign said Texans would reject the Democrats’ policies and candidates.
“Every single Democrat set to speak at this convention is completely out of touch with Texas values,” Samantha Cotten said in a prepared statement.
“President Trump and Republicans up and down the ballot have led the Lone Star State to new heights, and voters will resoundingly reaffirm their support for America First policies this November.”
Next month Texas Republicans will stage a traditional inperson convention in Houston.
Democratic National Committee Chairman Tom Perez told delegates Monday that Texas was a critical swing state.
He said the national party has invested nearly $700,000 in Texas Democrats.
“Texas is a key part of our battleground buildup program and this cycle,” Perez said.
“These investments are already funding staff across your state.”
Perez called the situation in America a “fivealarm blaze” that needs “all hands on deck.” “You all have been those first responders in our democracy, working tirelessly in your communities, making sure we are together as a party,” he said.
“We know that our unity is indeed our greatest strength and Donald Trump’s worst nightmare.”
Out of the wilderness
Democrats haven’t won a statewide race since 1994, when Dan Morales was Texas’ attorney general.
At the presidential level, a Democrat hasn’t won in Texas since 1976, when Jimmy Carter beat Gerald Ford.
For most of the last two decades, the lack of statewide victories has demoralized party activists and political donors, with the latter helping to make Texas a political ATM for candidates outside of the state.
Texas statewide candidates, with few exceptions, were underfunded and underdogs.
But in 2018 former U.S. Rep. Beto O’rourke of El Paso came within 2.6 percentage points of beating Republican
Sen. Ted Cruz, raising a stunning $80 million in the process and helping to sweep downballot Democrats to victory in congressional, Texas House and judicial contests.
O’rourke’s campaign, and close finishes in other statewide races, gave Democrats the confidence that their rebuilding project was ready for the next level.
The party’s grassroots staff is larger than ever, and national Democratic organizations like the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee have outposts in Texas.
“The Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee made Texas ground zero for the 2020 election,” said Rep. Cheri Bustos, Dillinois and chairwoman of the committee.
“Tam immensely proud of the momentum we have built all together from the beginning,” she told the video audience.
“And I’m even more hopeful about the road ahead in Texas.” The biggest national question is what kind of investment Biden will make from the top of the ticket.
His campaign has described Texas — along with Georgia and Arizona — as a new battleground state.
If Texas is truly a swing state, it will be the biggest battleground in the nation.
With Cornyn also a Democratic target, Air Force combat veteran MJ Hegar of Round Rock and state Sen. Royce West of Dallas will debate Saturday in Austin during the convention as they vie for the right to take him on in November.
Goal: Texas House
Though beating Trump is the stated goal for nearly every American Democrat, those in Texas are equally focused on winning the state House.
In 2003, Republicans took control of the House for the first time since Reconstruction, a severe blow to Democrats because the GOP was able to dictate policy and redraw legislative
boundaries to make elections more favorable for Republican candidates.
Winning the House would give Democrats a greater voice in the redistricting process, and also potentially help usher in progressive policies related to health care, education, the environment and the economy.
“It’s very important for Democrats to win the Texas House in order to deliver long overdue reforms to the people of Texas,” said Rep. Chris Turner, Dgrand Prairie and leader of the House Democratic Caucus.
In 2018, Democrats netted 12 seats in the House, with most of the victories in North Texas.
The Dallasfort Worth area is again where the fiercest political fighting will occur.
Democrats are looking to flip at least five seats in Tarrant County.
They also want to take the two remaining GOP House seats in Dallas County, held by Morgan Meyer of University Park and Angie Chen Button of Garland.
But Democrats must also protect the seats they gained two years ago.
“While Donald Trump fuels the politics of hate and our families are struggling to keep the lights on, I am working across the aisle to ensure families, small businesses, people of color, women and children have the resources they need and deserve to make it through this economic crisis,” said state Rep. Victoria Neave, Ddallas, a GOP target in November.
