Dallas protests turn ugly
Shop owners clean up damage in downtown, Deep Ellum At City Hall, police use tear gas to disperse crowds Abbott calls out Guard, state troopers
The Dallas Morning News - 31 May 2020 - 1A - Staff Writers By OBED MANUEL, DAN SINGER, KEVIN KRAUSE, CORBETT SMITH, DOM DIFURIO and MARC RAMIREZ
As demonstrators gathered for a second straight day on Saturday in Dallas to decry police brutality and the killings of black people nationwide, many businesses in the downtown area locked down and police again deployed tear gas to disperse the angry crowds.
Late Saturday, police said Whole Foods grocery in Uptown was being looted, and police called for all downtown buildings to be locked down.
Dallas Area Rapid Transit announced a halt to downtown service for the safety of riders and employees.
Just before 9 p.m. Saturday, Dallas police said they had made 13 arrests after closing off parts of downtown.
All of this followed a day of mayhem that ensnared even nonparticipants: A young woman who said she had not been part of the protests and who didn’t want to be identified was left with a bloody face Saturday evening after apparently being hit by a rubber bullet fired by police as she walked home with groceries.
Gov.
Greg Abbott said Saturday that he had marshaled the Texas National Guard and 1,500 state troopers to respond to unrest in Dallas, Austin, Houston and San Antonio.
“Texans have every right to exercise their First Amendment rights, but violence and looting will not be tolerated,” the governor said in a prepared statement.
Early Saturday afternoon in Dallas, several hundred people of various ages and races gathered peacefully at City Hall, chanting “No more” as workers inside peered from the windows.
“How do you spell racist?
DPD,” the crowd said, turning its attention to the building.
Then those gathered took a knee.
“Say his name,” they demanded.
“George Floyd.”
Within hours, the mood would turn combative, with clouds of tear gas wafting throughout the municipal plaza and officers behind riot shields threatening pepper
spray as the angry crowds swelled to over 1,000 and traversed the same downtown streets where stores had been looted and landmarks vandalized the night before.
Friday’s demonstration had drawn over 1,000 people to Dallas police headquarters, prefacing an unruly, chaotic march in which some resorted to violence and disorder to vent their frustrations, toppling trash bins, blocking roadways and pelting police squad cars with water bottles.
As events tested police patience, the department posted a statement on Twitter warning against such behavior: “We respect the rights of peaceful protesters, but violence or destruction of property is unacceptable,” it said.
Cities across the country have seen increasing unrest after the death of George Floyd, a black man who died in Minneapolis as an officer knelt on his neck during an arrest.
Video of the arrest, which occurred after Floyd allegedly used a counterfeit bill at a convenience store, sparked nationwide outcry and has led to more urgent demands for police to be held accountable.
Officer Derek Chauvin has been arrested and charged with thirddegree murder and manslaughter in the Floyd’s death.
Still, Saturday’s protests continued for hours as demonstrators took to the streets.
By early evening, some were spilling onto Woodall Rodgers Freeway, tying up traffic and prompting police calls for backup.
Malls shut down
Social media posts and comments from Dallas officials earlier in the day suggested that area malls might be looted.
Police ramped up their presence, accordingly, but the threats didn’t pan out.
NorthPark Center, Galleria Dallas and Highland Park Village all shut down early Saturday, and Target closed and boarded up several of its locations in Dallas and Austin.
NorthPark’s decision to close the upscale, enclosed mall was made “out of an abundance of caution and at the recommendation of the Dallas Police Department,” said spokeswoman Kristen Gibbins.
The mall was reacting to the possibility of planned protests spreading Saturday to the area north of downtown.
Gibbins said additional security staff had been hired to work with Dallas police to secure the mall.
Galleria general manager Angie Freed said the North Dallas mall closed Saturday and would remain closed on Sunday.
Highland Park Village closed early Saturday.
Lemuel Randolph was among those who attended Saturday’s event at City Hall, mindful of his two sons and his daughter.
“To know that I’m 54 years old and I have two African American young men that I’m trying to push into the world, and to see these kind of things continue unabated — it just gets to you,” he said.
Dellandra Musa, 26, said she was there because she believes the country and city need police policy reform.
“We need policies that put ‘Black Lives Matter’ into the equation of ‘All Lives Matter,’ ” she said.
“We shouldn’t fear the people who are supposed to protect us.”
Musa said she wasn’t at Friday night’s protest and didn’t approve of the unrest fueled by some in the crowd because she believes in peaceful protesting.
“T don’t believe in destruction.
I believe in systems that are going to protect us,” she said.
As the afternoon wore on, the crowd marched through downtown.
As the group crossed Main Street, site of much of Friday night’s destruction, drivers stepped out of their cars and honked their horns in solidarity.
After making a brief loop downtown, the protesters ended up back at City Hall.
That’s when the situation escalated, with police firing tear gas and protesters once again hitting the streets.
Officers in riot gear lined up in front of the bronze steers at Pioneer Plaza, at Young and Griffin Streets, warning protesters to move back.
But the crowd swelled in protest when a young woman was taken into custody for not following orders, forced onto the ground and put in zip ties.
“That’s how you treat your wife,” one female protester taunted.
The line of officers pushed north on Griffin, deploying flash bangs and firing pepper spray and tear gas canisters.
“Walk back.
Don’t run,” protester Michael Leon Cornute instructed the crowd, using a megaphone.
Later, as demonstrators crossed back through downtown, Cornute — born in Oak Cliff — said he was surprised to see as many white allies as turned up in Saturday’s march.
“We're not civilized by any means if we can’t figure out a way to treat each other with dignity and respect,” he said.
At Commerce and Pearl, Ashunti Radford and Jenika Moncada had been pushing a stroller carrying Moncada’s 2yearold son, Valentin, away from the conflict when police fired tear gas in their direction.
Moncada poured milk into her son’s eyes to relieve his pain.
“It’s wild,” Radford said.
“They wouldn’t let us leave.
They just kept following us.” Through the late afternoon and evening, the protest never hit a frenzied pitch.
While some threw water bottles at police officers, and a small group of others tagged buildings and boardedup windows with “BLM” — for “Black Lives Matter” — and other more profane slogans, such instances were outliers.
When a few protesters started to enter a 7Eleven at Commerce and Harwood streets, a crowd gathered to shout them down and others pulled them out of the store to thwart any potential looting.
Kelani Young, 24, said she had been motivated to attend the afternoon’s rally by the killing of Botham Jean, a black man who was sitting in his apartment when he was shot dead by sinceconvicted Dallas police Officer Amber Guyger, who mistook the apartment for her own.
“We really came out to protest in Dallas today because the Dallas Police Department failed Botham when they allowed the police officer to get away with just the smallest sentence.
She walked into the apartment and killed him.
...
In Minnesota, they have to realize they’re not alone.”
She and others said there are reasons that many protests have taken violent turns.
“T feel like [President Donald] Trump set a tone yesterday when he tweeted about ‘when the looting starts the shooting starts.’ ... We’re trying to be as peaceful as possible and they’re still trying to torment.”
Alexis Randles, 34, said she was at Friday’s protest but left before tensions escalated between police and demonstrators.
“People are upset, and I can’t tell you how you’re supposed to protest,” she said.
