Event aims to battle ‘two pandemics’ with prayer
Estimated crowd of 100 gathers near Edmond Police headquarters for faith event
EDMOND — The need for unity was a theme that ran throughout a prayer gathering held Thursday near the Edmond Police headquarters, 100 E First St.
| Qeear loa fe og A unified effort will be necessary to defeat “two pandemics” — COVID-19 and another insidious foe — racial injustice, the Rev.
Ronnie Ladd said during an event titled “Morning of Prayer.” “It is a clear and present danger in our society, in our communities, in the marketplace and in some of our churches,” Ladd said of systemic racism.
“Jesus was our first responder when it came to racism.
Christians can become first responders by confronting the evil of racism.
It's long overdue.” The preacher spoke to a racially diverse crowd of about 100 people from different churches in and around the Edmond area.
The group met at 8 a.m. in a park- like area that was just steps away from Edmond Police headquarters and Edmond Mayor Dan O'Neil said it was the site of the police department's former offices.
Ladd, a pastor at Our Lord's Community Church, 11400 N Portland Ave., said he asked to hold the event because he felt the community would benefit from a time of prayer in the aftermath of the May 25 death of George Floyd, an unarmed black man who died while in the custody of Minneapolis police.
Ladd said he is friends with Edmond Deputy Police Chief Tim Dorsey and he was part of a prayer service held outside the police department several years ago.
Edmond Police Chief JD Younger told the crowd that he was glad Ladd didn't ask to come pray for the police department but for the community as a whole.
“With that came the recognition that there is no ‘them' in ‘us' — there's just us,” Younger said, drawing applause from the crowd.
For 45 minutes, different ministers led prayers and members of the community were also invited to pray.
“This is what we need.
We need to meet.
We need to be together.
We need to pray,” said the Rev.
Jon Cook, an Edmond Police chaplain.
The Rev.
Amy Rogers, pastor of First United Presbyterian Church in Guthrie, led a prayer for a sense of “deep humility” to sweep through the country to bring about “true change.” “Lord, we need to learn that hard place in this hard hour.
We need to do more listening and less lecturing,” she said.
Like Ladd, the Rev.
Randall House, pastor of Impact Community church, also made reference to a fight against the COVID-19 pandemic and a “cultural pandemic.” He said the latter can be fought by adhering to the biblical premise to “love one another as ourselves.” Constance Ladd, Ronnie Ladd's wife, led a prayer for George Floyd's family and mothers who have lost sons and daughters in a tragic way due to “evil in high places.”
“We grieve and weep with them,” she said.
In a particularly poignant moment, Esther Kerr, who is white and the children's pastor of Our Lord's Community Church, tearfully prayed for courage to speak out in the face of racism, including places where it is “propped up by silence.”
“I've been afraid to say things, and it's wrong.
It's costly to the black community, and I'm sorry,” she said.
“Where I lack courage bring light to racial injustice, give me courage.” Crowd prays for police
Edmond Police became the focus of prayer at several points.
The Rev.
Roc Bottomly, a former senior pastor of Our Lord's Community Church, asked police officers in attendance to go to the middle of the crowd and people stretched out their hands towards them as the minister prayed.
Bottomly said he wanted to pray for the officers and leaders and remind attendees that God is “far more powerful “than evil.
Dorsey, Edmond's deputy chief, also prayed.
“T ask You to change us, work in all of us,” he said.
“Give us compassion, give us wisdom to reflect You each day.”
Ladd said he regularly prays for the protection of police whom he called “front liners.” He ended the prayer event by asking the crowd to stretch their hands towards the police headquarters while he prayed that the Lord “build a hedge of protection around every man and woman that wears the color blue.”
Several people in the crowd said they were glad they were a part of the gathering.
“T think it's a great show of unity, great diversity,” Sgt.
Jon Cramer, a 29-year veteran with the Edmond Police, said Thursday.
Doug Burleson, a member of Crossings Community Church-Edmon4d, also said the event was a positive step for the community.
“It was good for the community and the right time for the community.
It wasn't about the rights and wrongs but what we can do next,” he said.
Police chief Younger said he loved the brief service because it focused on community and encouraged people's “hearts to be softened to hear the experiences of others and to take action.”
“We recognize the police are a component of this and have a role in this discussion, but it's really about the community, how we serve and love each other.
And it's about our individual hearts,” Younger said.
