Trump is failing the test of leadership
USA TODAY US Edition - 1 Jun 2020 - 1A - Susan Page
At times of national trauma, commanders in chief have often seen themselves as consolers in chief: Barack Obama after the Sandy Hook massacre.
George W. Bush after 9/11.
Bill Clinton after the Oklahoma City bombings.
FDR during the Great Depression.
Not Donald Trump.
In the middle of the busiest intersection of disasters in modern times, President Trump on Sunday presented himself more as the confronter in chief.
He denounced the media as “FAKE NEWS” and labeled protesters in the streets — some peaceful and some not —
No one has the platform of the president or the power to set the tone of the national debate.
as “Radical Left Anarchists” who should be crushed by the National Guard.
His model was more like Richard Nixon, whose unyielding law-and-order stance against Vietnam War protesters helped him win the White House in 1968.
Now the combination of crises has overshadowed even that historically tumultuous year.
The moment has underscored the power of the White House as a bully pulpit and the difficulty of any other voice to fill the role of national unifier if the president does not.
Instead, on display Sunday were America’s divisions at a time of death, fear and violence.
In the space of a few months, one calamity has been stacked on top of another: The COVID19 pandemic with a deadly toll that has topped 100,000 Americans.
The economic consequences of responding to the health emergency that has thrown an astonishing 40 million out of work.
The death of a handcuffed black man in Minneapolis after a police officer knelt on his neck, a brutal reminder of an longstanding injustice.
The video of George Floyd pleading for breath prompted protests in Minneapolis and nationwide that began largely peacefully and then exploded Saturday night into arson and vandalism, including in the streets around the White House.
The protests in downtown Washington started after Trump tweeted words with a racist history: “When the looting starts, the shooting starts.”
Mayors in Chicago and Atlanta scolded the protesters, and governors in at least a dozen states and the District of Columbia called up the National Guard to restore order.
Religious leaders prayed for calm.
But not even Joe Biden, Trump’s presumptive Democratic opponent in this fall’s presidential election, could clearly break through the din.
“We are a nation furious at injustice,” the former vice president said in an emotional statement posted on Medium.com that decried both police brutality and violent protests.
Nor could a former president; Barack Obama on Friday issued a statement saying he shares the “anguish” many feel about Floyd’s death.
No one has the platform of the president or the power to set the tone of the national debate.
On Saturday, Trump issued a warning to protesters that they would face “vicious
dogs and ominous weapons.” That brought an extraordinary rebuke from the mayor of the town in which he lives, Muriel Bowser.
“There are no vicious dogs & ominous weapons,” the mayor of Washington, D.C., tweeted Sunday.
In one more sign of the anger and contempt in the national conversation, she added, “There is just a scared man.
Afraid/alone.”
At the White House, the president’s advisers reportedly were divided over whether he should deliver an address to the nation, as his predecessors have sometimes done at difficult times.
In March, Trump himself had delivered an 11-minute Oval Office address on the coronavirus, although independent fact-checkers said the speech was filled with misleading information and it was blamed for travel chaos and a stock market plunge that followed.
“Whether he has an address from the Oval or he speaks to the press, he’s accessible and will continue to be accessible to the country and give his views on these events, which are tragic for the country,” national security adviser Robert O’Brien said on CNN’s “State of the Union.”
Indeed, Trump was giving his views on these events on his favorite communications channel, his Twitter feed.
They seemed designed not to unify but to sharpen the cultural divide and stoke his partisan base.
“Congratulations to our National Guard for the great job they did immediately upon arrived in Minneapolis, Minnesota, last night,” he said.
“ANTIFA led anarchists, among others, were shut down quickly.” He posted another tweet that said: “The United States of America will be designating ANTIFA as a Terrorist Organization,” a reference to a loosely affiliated movement of anti-facist provocateurs.
And another: “The Lamestream Media is doing everything within their power to foment hatred and anarchy,” he tweeted.
“As long as everybody understands what they are doing, that they are FAKE NEWS and truly bad people with a sick agenda, we can easily work through them to GREATNESS.”
That tweet followed attacks on reporters by protesters in Detroit, Minneapolis, Phoenix and elsewhere.
Police officers fired pepper spray at journalists who were covering the demonstrations in Louisville and arrested journalists in Minneapolis and Las Vegas.
For the first time, Twitter itself added warning labels to two tweets by Trump and the White House about the Minneapolis protests, saying they glorified violence.
Maryland Gov.
Larry Hogan, a Republican, described Trump’s rhetoric as “not helpful.” Atlanta Mayor Keisha Lance Bottoms, a Democrat, issued a public plea to the president.
“There are times that you should just stop, and this is one of those times,” she said on CBS’ “Face the Nation.” “He’s making it worse.”
Wars, recessions, pandemics and civil unrest have left scars in American history that that change the country’s course, sometimes for better, sometimes for worse.
The challenges of today will surely reverberate through the year and beyond in ways that are impossible at the moment to predict.
Not to mention through November’s election.
