Confederate flag banned
NASCAR banned the Confederate flag, a familiar sight at its events for more than 70 years, from its races and venues, formally severing itself from what for many is a symbol of slavery and racism.
The Dallas Morning News - 11 Jun 2020 - 1A - By DAN GELSTON
NASCAR banned the Confederate flag from its races and properties Wednesday, formally distancing itself from what for many is a symbol of slavery and racism, but one that had been a familiar sight at stock car events for more than 70 years.
NASCAR did not address how it would enforce the policy or indicate any penalties for fans who violate it by bringing the Confederate flag to the track.
NASCAR has not raced with fans since the sport resumed last month amid the coronavirus pandemic and is expected to have few fans allowed at races this month in Florida and Georgia.
NASCAR comes to Texas Motor Speedway on July 1819 with
races in its Xfinity, Trucks and Cup series.
TMS and NASCAR are working with state officials to determine whether fans will be admitted, and how many.
“Texas Motor Speedway is, and always will be, a place where everyone is welcome and included,” Eddie Gossage, president and general manager of TMS, said Wednesday in a prepared statement.
“The family atmosphere that exists in the motor sports industry is second to none.
We support NASCAR in its position on the Confederate flag and will work together to remove it from our events and our sport.”
‘No place’ in the sport
The banning of the flag comes amid social unrest around the globe following the death in police custody of George Floyd, an unarmed black man in Minneapolis.
Protests have roiled the nation for days, and Confederate monuments are being taken down across the South — the traditional fan base for NASCAR.
Bubba Wallace, NASCAR’S lone black driver, called this week for the banishment of Confederate flags and said there was “no place” for them in the sport.
Now, NASCAR has obliged.
“The presence of the Confederate flag at NASCAR events runs contrary to our commitment to providing a welcoming and inclusive environment for all fans, our competitors and our industry, “NASCAR said.
“Bringing people together around a love for racing and the community that it creates is what makes our fans and sport special.
The display of the Confederate flag will be prohibited from all NASCAR events and properties.”
The move was announced before Wednesday night’s race at Martinsville Speedway, where Wallace, an Alabama native, was driving a Chevrolet with a #Blacklivesmatter paint scheme.
Wallace got a shoutout on Twitter from several athletes, including NBA star Lebron James, for using the paint scheme in the race.
Wallace, wearing an American flag mask, clapped his hands when asked about the decision before the start of the race.
“It’s been a stressful couple of weeks,” Wallace said.
Thorny issue
The flag issue has been a thorny one for NASCAR.
In 2015, former chairman Brian France tried to ban the flying of Confederate flags at race tracks, angering many fans.
Five years ago, the flag issue was front and center for NASCAR after nine black churchgoers were slain in Charleston, S.C.
The man currently on death row for the murders, Dylann Roof, had embraced Confederate symbols before the attack, prompting a reappraisal of the role such symbols play in the South.
Tracks offered to exchange American flags for Confederate flags, but there were few takers, and flags have continued to be seen at the events.
Several drivers — including twotime Daytona 500 champion Denny Hamlin — said they supported Wallace in his quest to rid the sport of the flag.
The predominantly white field of drivers united over the weekend for a video promoting social change.
A black NASCAR official, Kirk Price, took a knee before Sunday’s race near Atlanta in what may have been a first for the series.
Wallace wore a black Tshirt with the words “I Can’t Breathe” at the race.
NASCAR President Steve Phelps addressed the drivers before last Sunday’s race at Atlanta Motor Speedway and vowed to to do a better job of addressing racial injustice in the wake of Floyd’s death.
“Phelps and I have been in a contact a lot just trying to figure out what steps are next,” Wallace said.
“That was a huge pivotal moment for the sport.
Lot of backlash, but it creates doors for the community to come together as one.”
