Pandemic’s drain on oil demand offers peek at industry’s future
Major CEOs to face questions over crisis
Houston Chronicle - 27 May 2020 - Ai - By Paul Takahashi STAFF WRITER
The coronavirus pandemic has brought into sharp relief the existential threat posed to the world’s biggest oil companies from policies aimed at combating climate change by offering a glimpse into a future with little demand for petroleum products such as gasoline, diesel and jet fuel.
It has also brought to the fore a question with profound implications for the energy industry and Houston, where fortunes rise and fall with the price of oil.
Has the virus — in two short but life-altering months — fundamentally changed society and consumer behavior, making it likely that global oil demand would peak earlier than expected, perhaps even during this decade?
This debate over Big Oil’s future will weigh heavily on shareholders of Chevron and Exxon Mobil as they gather — virtually, of course — at the companies’ annual meetings Wednesday.
Analysts say the U.S.
oil giants, among the strongest globally, are well equipped and financed to weather the short-term challenge of the coronavirus crisis and the longer-term transition toward a future with fewer fossil fuels.
“There are two types of energy companies going through this crisis: The ones that are doing everything they can to survive and the ones with strong balance sheets that are looking to be more competitive long-term,” said Duane Dickson, vice chairman of Deloitte Consulting specializing in the oil, gas and chemicals sector.
“The oil majors are not in survival mode.
They’re trying to come out of this in the best possible position, and potentially redefine themselves.”
Exxon Mobil, headquartered in Irving, and Chevron, in San Ramon, Calif., are among the Houston area’s biggest employers, with a combined workforce of nearly 23,000, according to a Houston Chronicle survey.
But the coronavirus-driven oil crash is hitting them and other oil majors hard, forcing deep cuts in spending and production, which has quickly fallen to the lowest level in nearly two decades.
The European oil major Royal Dutch Shell even sliced its dividend for the first time since World War II.
Exxon Mobil, which reported a first-quarter loss of $610 million and revenue of $56.2 billion, slashed its 2020 capital budget by 30 percent to $23 billion.
The company is expected
to cut its U.S. output by about 74,000 barrels per day in May and June, according to Rystad Energy, a Norwegian research firm.
Chevron, which reported firstquarter earnings of $3.6 billion and revenue of $31.5 billion, reduced its 2020 capital budget by 12.5 percent to $14 billion.
Chevron said it expects to cut its U.S. output in May by about 66,000 barrels per day and by 80,000 barrels per day in June, a reduction of about 35 percent and 42 percent, respectively.
“The supermajors are cutting (capital spending) heavily in the Permian Basin,” said Dane Gregoris, senior vice president with RS Energy, a Calgary-based research firm.
“The tune from these operators given their experience in this industry is they’re being a lot more conservative in terms of putting capital back in the ground and keeping production flat until prices rise.
“In order to bring back rigs to the U.S., you need $50-plus West Texas Intermediate,” the benchmark grade of crude of oil, he added.
Diversified businesses
Unlike independent producers primarily focused on extracting oil and gas out of shale rock, the oil majors are large integrated companies with operations from exploration and production to refining and petrochemicals to retail sales.
That diversification has allowed them to pivot in response to the coronavirus.
Exxon Mobil’s petrochemical operations have increased production of isopropyl alcohol and polypropylene, used in the production of hand sanitizer and protective masks, gowns and wipes, while shifting manufacturing in Louisiana to produce hand sanitizer.
“Depressed oil prices, of course, have an impact on the majors, but in many respects, they make it up because they have the product all the way through,” said Ed Hirs, a petroleum economist at the University of Houston.
“They’re hurt in the upstream, but they make it up in the downstream.”
The majors also boast vast and diverse portfolios of oil and gas projects.
While the majors have slashed spending in shale, which can be drilled relatively quickly, most remain committed to offshore projects in Africa, South America and the Gulf of Mexico that take years to develop but will buttress output in the future.
“These are companies that plan for a longer horizon,” Hirs said.
“For them, it’s not about being here five years, 10 years from now, but decades and decades from now.
These large enterprises have the financial wherewithal to weather storms like this.”
The majors also have deep reservoirs of cash that would allow them to buy struggling rivals and strengthen their portfolio of assets.
Hirs said he expects merger and acquisition activity will pick up in the middle of summer; Deloitte forecasts increased M&A by the end of the year.
“It’s the time to consider (M&A) opportunities but do it carefully,” said Kate Hardin, executive director for the Deloitte Research Center for Energy and Industrials.
“The majors are well positioned to do that kind of investigation and careful approach.”
Different outlooks
As Exxon and Chevron head into annual meetings, they face shareholder resolutions that would create an independent board chairman, splitting the roles of chairman and chief executive, held respectively by Darren Woods at Exxon Mobil and Mike Wirth at Chevron.
The
resolutions, similar to ones defeated last year, are supported by institutional investors urging the companies to act more quickly to address climate change and adjust their businesses.
Both companies have taken steps toward the low-carbon future.
Exxon, for example, is developing biofuels, notably from algae, while Chevron has invested in solar, wind and geothermal power sources.
But they have moved less aggressively than their European rivals, which have set goals of netzero greenhouse emissions from their operations and products by 2050.
Shell CEO Ben van Beurden recently told analysts that oil demand could peak within the decade.
Woods, however, has embraced a more optimistic outlook for petroleum as Exxon has invested heavily in extracting oil and gas from rich deposits in the Permian Basin and off the coast of Guyana in South America.
Speaking to analysts earlier this month, Woods cited internal projections that global energy consumption is expected rise around 20 percent by 2040 from 2017, as the world’s population grows to more than 9 billion people from about 7 billion.
Before the pandemic, global demand for oil was around 100 million barrels of oil per day.
Demand has fallen about 25 percent as people stayed home and businesses closed to stop the spread of the coronavirus.
“Billions of people will enter the middle class and seek lifestyles and products that require energy.
Economies will expand once again,” Woods said.
“Of course, there are likely to be some bumps in the road over the short term, but historically, periods of economic contraction are followed by periods of significant growth.”
Chevron’s Wirth, in a separate call with investors and analysts, said he, too, was an optimist, but struck a more somber tone.
“T believe that the world will return to some post-coronavirus form of normal, and that means economic activity, it means growth, it means travel,” Wirth said.
“The pace and the patterns at which that reemerges, I think, are still open to a wide range of views.
And I don’t know that anybody can predict that exactly.”
