CROSSFIT GYMS PONDER FUTURE
Hampton Roads businesses consider dropping branding
Daily Press - 13 Jun 2020 - 1: By Kimberly Pierceall Staff writer
The man who invented the CrossFit brand of workouts has resigned, but the name may be so beyond repair that many of the independent gyms that have paid $3,000 a year to use it — including some in Hampton Roads — are seriously thinking about ditching it.
First came COVID-19.
Then came the CEO’s controversial comments.
“Everyone is just emotionally exhausted from everything,” and wanting to work out together as a community again, Cortney Cunningham, owner of CrossFit Stimulus in Hampton, said Wednesday about the last few months spent in relative isolation amid a pandemic.
After all that, CrossFit founder and CEO Greg Glassman’s recent comments online as well as during a recorded conference call with some gym owners felt like “a stab in the gut.”
Responding to a tweet by the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation on June 6 declaring in all caps that “racism is a public health issue,” Glassman tweeted “It’s FLOYD-19,” making a reference to the killing of George Floyd in Minneapolis.
Floyd’s death led to days of protests calling attention to police brutality across the country and in other parts of the world.
Plenty of gyms that had licensed the CrossFit name had wanted to see the company respond with sensitivity and support, as many other corporations had done.
Instead, they got that tweet.
And before he had sent that tweet, the CEO was recorded during an online Zoom meeting with affiliated gym owners making comments that downplayed the reasons for the protests and pushed conspiracy theories, according to Buzzfeed
News, which obtained a copy of the recording and wrote about it.
“T doubt very much that they’re mourning for Floyd,” Glassman said on the call about protesters and people calling for the company to speak out, according to the Buzzfeed report.
“I don’t think that there’s a general mourning for Floyd in any community.”
In a statement Tuesday announcing he would step down from the company he started, because of the bad publicity, Glassman said he had “created a rift in the CrossFit community and unintentionally hurt many of its members.”
CrossFit is a form of highintensity interval training that Glassman helped to develop and trademark 20 years ago.
At least 33 affiliate CrossFit locations from Toano to Virginia
Beach pay annually for the right to use the CrossFit name and branding, among more than 15,000 gyms worldwide to do so, but unlike a franchise, there’s no corporate involvement in the individual gyms.
Three Ships CrossFit in Chesapeake told its members in an email this week that it would be dropping the CrossFit affiliation and eventually rebranding as Three Ships Collective.
Adroit CrossFit in Norfolk says its affiliate agreement will be up for renewal in a few months.
Owner Ashley Mitchell said they’re “very curious to see what if any changes come out of this for CrossFit as a company.” Her gym, which opened in 2017, has long referred to itself as simply Adroit, eschewing the typical CrossFit design for a space that more resembled a modern brewery or restaurant, she said.
Now, though, she and her husband, Jeremy, are working on officially rebranding as The Adroit Collective.
“Adroit has always been a place of inclusivity and diversity, and as soon as we learned of what was going on, we knew there was no way we could continue to align ourselves with a company that did not appear to share our same values.”
Like at Cunningham’s gym, the controversy hasn’t dampened business.
Mitchell said their membership has grown since reopening.
CrossFit posted a lengthy comment on the matter online Tuesday titled, “Why didn’t CrossFit just say something?” and describing Glassman’s statements as “incredibly insensitive and hurtful.”
‘““We weren’t sure how to get the message right, and as a result, we failed catastrophically by not effectively communicating care for the Black community, all as the online world was watching and experiencing extreme pain,” the letter says.
“We, the members of CrossFit HQ, have failed to meet a moment when the community wanted to hear from us most.
For that, we extend our deepest and sincerest apologies.
We are sorry.”
Cunningham called Glassman’s comments an embarrassment.
“That’s certainly not the view and not the voice of CrossFit overall,” she said.
She and other owners and gym members are waiting to see what tangible actions the company will take following an apology that she said came too late.
For seven years, Cunningham has used “Stimulus Strength” in branding.
During the pandemic, the gym put the phrase on shirts, adding to the back of the shirts the words “the comeback is always greater than the setback,” and gave them to members who reached achievements even while working out from home.
Now she’s seriously considering making it more than just a slogan.
She’s bought the domain name stimulusstrength.com and has been heartened by the arrival of brand-new members who didn’t appear to be drawn to her gym by the “CrossFit” name alone.
She said she and other affiliated gyms had been asking corporate CrossFit for changes fora while, especially to involve affiliates more in the company’s direction.
“We have little to no say in what the company is doing.
We’ve been blindfolded and in the dark for a long time.”
