Result delays prove costly Turnaround frustrates efforts to isolate sick, stem spread in Texas
AUSTIN — Last month, as the first reports of sickness came in from East Texas nursing homes, jails and a chicken processing plant — all known breeding grounds for the coronavirus — state testing teams descended.
They took samples, and county officials waited.
Days passed, then a week.
For some, results didn’t come back for almost two weeks.
By then, they were all but useless.
“We were certainly hoping to get quick results so [company] management could take quick action to get those people off the line, get them home, warn their families,” said Titus County Judge Brian Lee, who accepted the state’s offer for help after a few cases were linked to a chicken processing plant in Mount Pleasant.
“But when your tests take 12 days to come in, you have lost the benefit.”
Fast testing is critical to stem the spread of COVID19, public health experts say.
The virus is so contagious that even a few days’ delay in isolating sick people can increase disease spread.
For that reason, Gov.
Greg Abbott ordered widespread testing at all nursing homes last month and sent mobile test teams to places with few of their own medical resources.
Delays arose in early May, when the state said it collected more samples than its labs had the capacity to process.
Even though the state brought on nine more laboratories to handle the workload, they’re only now beginning to catch up, said Seth Christensen,
spokesman for the Texas Division of Emergency Management.
As of Thursday, 97% of the test results have been given to patients or have been pending for fewer than three days, Christensen said.
The delays come at a time when statewide hospitalizations have risen to their highest levels since the pandemic began.
On Saturday, over 2,400 people were in the hospital with the coronavirus, state data shows.
Those numbers are driven largely by the state’s biggest cities, including Dallas, officials have said.
On Friday, for the third day in a row, Dallas County reported that more than 370 people were hospitalized with the coronavirus.
Hospitalizations had been below 350 in recent weeks.
‘Defeats the purpose’
Some nursing homes still had not received test results by Thursday, after waiting more than two weeks, according to one nursing home medical director and two associations that represent them statewide.
A delayed result in a nursing home can be particularly worrisome, since elderly people are at higher risk of developing deadly cases of COVID19.
“Tt sort of defeats the purpose of having the test,” said George Linial, president and CEO of LeadingAge Texas, which represents nonprofits that work in aging services.
“We applaud the effort of getting all nursing homes tested, but at the same time, it has got to be done much more efficiently and quickly.”
The state came in to test residents of a Clarksville nursing home on May 8, after someone there tested positive, said Red River County Judge L.D.
Williamson.
The results came back almost two weeks later, he said, so long that “it really hasn’t helped us a whole lot.”
“If they tested positive and we don’t know about it until the 20th, in the meantime they have been out and about and everyone they came in contact with could have caught it from them,” Williamson said.
More than 30 residents and over a dozen staff at the nursing home have now tested positive for the virus, he said.
The facility did not respond to multiple requests for comment.
One of those residents was Sandra Embrey’s 88yearold mother, Annie Pearl Storey, who lived at the facility when the testing team took samples.
By then, she was already in isolation because she had a fever, Embrey said
Three days later, with the test results still pending, Embrey said, her mother was hospitalized.
A coronavirus test at the hospital came back positive within an hour, she said.
Her mother died later that day.
While earlier results likely would not have made a difference for her mother, they would have offered Embrey a more complete picture of what was wrong.
She learned her mother’s condition only as she was dying.
“Tf the hospital can get it in an hour, you would think the state can get it in less than four or five days,” she said.
While residents wait for test results, they are often separated from others, adding to the loneliness of already being apart from family.
Nursing homes shut their doors to outside visitors when the pandemic began.
“We can’t have these kinds of delays that continue to go on if we are going to be, as we should be, reopening nursing facilities to families and the community again,” said Kevin Warren, president and CEO of the Texas Health Care Association, which represents skilled nursing and assisted living facilities.
Turnaround times
The state is now working with 11 different labs — five private and six public — to process samples.
Turnaround times vary.
The University of Texas Rio
Grande Valley sends results to the state within 24 hours, while the University of Texas Medical Branch turns around tests within 48 hours, spokesmen for the two facilities said.
The University of Texas M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center reports results within 48 hours, unless there are problems with the sample quality, which is rare, a spokesperson said.
LabCorp, a national company that was one of the first to begin testing for COVID19, would not provide specifics for testing turnaround times in Texas.
But a spokesman said the company is delivering results one to two days after receiving a sample.
The state’s own lab in Austin can test up to 1,400 specimens a day and reports results within 24 hours, said Chris Van Deusen, a spokesman for the Texas Department of State Health Services.
The other six labs, including UT Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas, did not respond to questions by email about their testing turnaround times.
The labs report results to the state, which passes them to local officials.
Christensen said private labs may have a goal to return results quickly, “but a goal doesn’t mean it is actually happening.”
The state aims to provide results within 96 hours after a sample is taken.
There are still pockets where it takes longer because of delays at labs, Christensen said.
State officials did not say what the average turnaround time has been.
The fourday target is realistic given the statewide scope of the testing, said Diana Cervantes, an epidemiologist at the University of North Texas Health Science Center in Fort Worth.
“In the perfect ideal world, it would be great if you could get results within hours or a day,” she said.
“But you have to balance the expectation with the realities of logistics.” The state did not name the labs that provide delayed results.
In early June, the state said it stopped working with one private lab after an abnormal number of positive results during testing at nursing homes.
The Health and Human Services Commission has not named the laboratory, but said it tested 14,000 people in Texas.
The agency contacted the affected nursing homes and told them not to act on the test results by quarantining or isolating residents.
Several facilities are retesting.
‘Still a pretty good delay’
Brooks County Judge Eric Ramos knows firsthand how varied staterun testing can be.
The state dispatched a mobile unit several times to test residents of the South Texas county, where the largest city of Falfurrias has fewer than 5,000 people.
People tested there May 22 received results within five days, he said.
But others tested 10 days earlier just got their results last week, almost a month after their noses were swabbed.
Ramos said the state told him the two sets of specimens went to different labs, but he said he doesn’t know the names of the labs or why the results took so long.
“We were flooded with calls and concerns regarding the delay,” Ramos said.
At the chicken processing plant in Titus County, Lee said, he isn’t sure how many employees tested positive.
Their results were mixed with those from the rest of the community.
He estimates that about 180 workers had the virus — a sizable portion of the county’s 572 confirmed cases to date.
In early June, the county offered residents another round of staterun testing over three days.
Nearly 500 people showed up and the first results began trickling in after a week.
On Friday, Lee was still waiting for the remaining 20%.
“It’s still a pretty good delay,” he said.
“Not as long as two weeks, but it still hinders effective decisionmaking.”
