As facilities open, new economic proposal on deck for MLB.
As Astros open facilities for workouts, key safety, economic issues are on deck
Houston Chronicle - 26 May 2020 - Ai - By Chandler Rome STAFF WRITER
Memorial Day came and went without Major League Baseball for the first time since 1880, according to Stats Perform, another sobering development in a year with too many to
SPRING TRAINING ROWE OF ThE
| HOUSTON ASTROS
If it is to occur, the coming week appears as crucial as any in the sport’s journey back from the coronavirus pandemic.
Teams continue to reopen their home facilities, including the Astros on Monday.
Last week, governors in Texas, New York and California expressed desires to host professional sports without fans this summer.
The hurdles between such hope and realization are numerous.
Commissioner Rob Manfred has targeted an opening day in early July, meaning a second spring training would need to start in early to mid-June.
Time is ticking.
For most of the last two weeks, Major League Baseball and the Players Association have focused negotiations on a vast health and safety protocol.
The league’s initial document was 67 pages.
Those who viewed it commended the thoroughness, encompassing everything from testing procedures to dugout social distancing to spitting habits to restrictions while on the road.
“It’s impressive,” Astros general manager James Click said Sunday.
“It is detailed.
They have thought of a lot of things.
They are clearly taking the situation very, very seriously.
We’re still working through it to determine how we can put it into place.”
Such expansiveness underscores the monumental undertaking facing the sport.
Playing in 28 cities amid a global pandemic requires foresight and planning for every contingency.
Even then, the virus ultimately dictates baseball’s direction, and players want to ensure their health before agreeing to anything.
Teams and players union representatives offered feedback to the league’s initial safety document in hopes of answering some still lingering questions.
Manfred said MLB plans to test players for COVID-19 “multiple times per week.” Angels superstar Mike Trout told ESPN he
didn’t envision playing unless there was daily testing.
Other issues within the proposal included the banning of showers at the ballpark and no usage of hot or cold tubs.
How the league can curtail spitting remains a legitimate question, too.
Both sides must find common ground before broaching a more contentious discussion.
According to multiple reports, MLB will present a new economic proposal to the players union Tuesday.
In March, players agreed to prorate their salaries if the 2020 season started.
Owners are now asking the players to take a further salary reduction given the possibility of empty stadiums.
Players want the prorated salaries they already agreed to.
Originally, owners approved a plan that included a revenue sharing system for 2020.
The players union has long resisted revenue sharing systems of any kind.
Such a proposal was the impetus for the 1994 strike.
The 2020 version received similar repugnance, leading to barbs from both sides via contentious media reports.
The Athletic reported Sunday the league no longer plans to present a revenue sharing system to the union but will still seek a further reduction in player salaries to combat the loss of gate revenue.
Deferrals in 2020 salaries “might be the choice the union is most willing to accept,” according to the report.
“That’s ultimately a very difficult decision for anybody
when you are weighing what this could look like and everything that goes into reopening,” Click said.
“I do sense (from players) a desire to get back out there and play.”
The Astros returned to facilities in Houston and Florida, initiating some semblance of normalcy in a time when little exists.
About six players were expected Monday at both Minute Maid Park and Fitteam Ballpark of the Palm Beaches in West Palm Beach, Fla., for individual workouts with severe restrictions.
Little was revealed regarding the workouts.
Bench coach Joe Espada accompanied the group at Minute Maid Park, where a large portion of the Astros’ starting lineup is expected to show if they choose.
Click said organizational coaches who live in Florida would run the proceedings in West Palm Beach.
The workouts were closed to the public.
The Astros did not make any player or coach available to the media Monday, continuing
their two-month trend.
Since the sport shut down March 13, the team has made one player — ace Justin Verlander — available to the media via a teleconference.
Click and manager Dusty Baker have each participated in one team-initiated conference call.
The Tampa Bay Rays joined the Astros in opening their major league ballpark Monday, hosting 14 players at Tropicana Field for staggered workouts similar to what was expected in Houston.
Players wore masks while not in athletic activity, and all staff wore personal
protective equipment.
Players and staff were screened before entering the park, and workouts were very individualized.
“A step in the right direction,” said Rays manager Kevin Cash, who was made available to Tampa reporters alongside outfielder Austin Meadows.
“And it was good to see some smiling faces.”
