A tighter grip Beijing moves to exert more control, block oftenviolent protests
The Dallas Morning News - 29 May 2020 - 1A - By ZEN SOO and KEN MORITSUGU
China ratified a plan for a national security law for Hong Kong that exerts Beijing’s new, broader control over the semiautonomous territory.
ey 3 >
HONG KONG — China officially ratified a plan Thursday to write a national security law for Hong Kong that exerts Beijing’s new, broader control over the semiautonomous territory in a bid to prevent a return of the months of oftenviolent protests last year.
The Beijingbacked Hong Kong government sought to assure its citizens that the law would not infringe on their freedoms, while the prodemocracy opposition described the move as the end of the core values that set the former British colony apart from the rest of China.
“From now on, Hong Kong is nothing but just another mainland Chinese city,” prodemocracy lawmaker Claudia Mo said.
China’s ceremonial legislature, ending a oneweek annual session curtailed because of the coronavirus, approved a decision by the ruling Communist Party to impose national security laws on Hong Kong.
The body’s standing committee, a smaller group with decisionmaking power, is charged with developing the specific laws against secession, subversion, terrorism and foreign interference in Hong Kong’s affairs.
No timetable has been announced, but they could be enacted at one of its next meetings in June and August.
The move marks a definitive end to China’s more lowkey approach to Hong Kong over the largescale protests last year, said Allen Carlson, a China expert at Cornell University.
Hong Kong leader Carrie Lam, who has come under fire for her handling of the protests, said the decision was welcome because of the difficulty her government faces in passing national security legislation on its own.
The city’s constitution requires it to enact sucha law, but successive governments have been unable or unwilling to because of opposition.
Lam said in a statement that new laws would “sanction an extremely small minority of criminals who threaten national security” and “not affect the legitimate rights and freedoms enjoyed by Hong Kong residents.”
In a joint statement, top diplomats from the United States, U.K., Canada and Australia reiterated their “deep concern” about Beijing’s decision to impose a national security law in Hong Kong.
Such a decision “would curtail the Hong Kong people’s liberties, and in doing so, dramatically erode Hong Kong’s autonomy and the system that made it so prosperous,” the statement said.
One of the signatories, U.S. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, had notified Congress on Wednesday that the Trump administration no longer regarded Hong Kong as autonomous from mainland China, setting the stage for the possible withdrawal of preferential trade and financial treatment that the U.S. gives to the former British colony.
As China’s orderly 3,000member Congress rubberstamped the move in Beijing, Hong Kong’s legislature was taking on another bill that would criminalize insulting or abusing the Chinese national anthem in a raucous session in which three prodemocracy lawmakers were ejected and proceedings were halted for about five hours.
