UT athletes call for end to ‘Eyes of Texas’
Players cite the song’s ties to minstrel shows, ask for university to rename several buildings
Houston Chronicle - 13 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Nick Moyle STAFF WRITER
AUSTIN — University of Texas athletes called Friday for changes in how the school supports black students on campus.
On social media, athletes asked for the renaming of buildings, creating freshman discussion groups on the history of racism on campus and replacing the school song, “The Eyes of Texas,” which has ties to minstrel shows and was created during segregation.
The players said they would continue to work out and play for the school but would not help recruit future athletes or appear at donor events until they get an official commitment from the university on change.
The Longhorns’ football team marched to the Texas Capitol last week in response to the Black Lives Matter protests that erupted nationwide following the death of George Floyd while in the custody of Minneapolis police.
Texas head coach Tom Herman, who marched alongside
players, said it was a precursor to something bigger.
“1 do know that our team is committed to making sure that that is not the last time that you will see Texas football out on the forefront of changing the landscape and system of our society as best we can,” Herman said.
“And they are committed to it — hook, line and sinker.”
The athletes’ collective cry Friday was the university’s own motto: “What starts here changes the world.
#WeAreOne.”
“The recent events across the country regarding racial injustice have brought to light the systemic racism that has always been prevalent in our country as well as the racism that has historically plagued our campus,” the athletes’ statement said.
“We aim to hold the athletic department and university to a higher standard by not only asking them to keep their promise of condemning racism on our campus, but to go beyond this by taking action to make Texas more comfortable and inclusive for the black athletes and black community that has so fervently supported this program,” the statement continued.
‘Meaningful conversations’
The most controversial of the letter’s demands was for Texas to stop using “The Eyes of Texas.” The song is regularly sung at nearly every organized campus event, and players in all sports gather as a team to sing it after every game.
The athletes asked not to be required to stand as it is played.
The letter also asked to rename several campus buildings named after state and school officials, including Robert Lee Moore and Theophilus Painter, both of whom have ties to the Texas era of Jim Crow laws and segregation.
The players also want the university’s athletics department to contribute 0.5 percent of its annual revenue — more than $1 million — to black organizations and the Black Lives Matter movement.
The group also asks that an area of Royal-Memorial Stadium be named after Julius Whittier, the first black football player at Texas.
Through a tweet responding to the students’ list of demands, Texas Athletics Director Chris Del Conte said he is “willing to have meaningful conversations regarding any concerns our student-athletes have.”
‘(We are aware of three petitions created by students and look forward to working with them and the UT community to create the best possible experience on our campus for Black students,” university spokesman J.B. Bird said in an email.
“The athletes coming out in the way that they have will bring the campus community closer together than it has been before,” said Edmund T. Gordon, an associate professor of African and African Diaspora Studies and the university’s vice provost for diversity.
“Athletics and the academic side of the university have been pretty separate over the years with a fair amount of resentment between all sides, and I think the athletes showing this kind of interest in moving forward is very impressive for both faculty and other students.
I think this is a moment of folks coming together in interesting kinds of ways.”
Texas is hardly the only college campus dotted by buildings and statues commemorating historically racist figures.
After pressure from former football players, including Deshaun Watson and DeAndre Hopkins, Clemson University trustees voted Friday to rename its honors college, stripping from the program the name of a former vice president and slavery proponent, John C. Calhoun.
Moore was a longtime mathematics teacher at UT.
He was also an avowed segregationist who refused to teach the few black students who were admitted in the years after Brown v. Board of Education.
Painter, who was the University of Texas president from 194452, was also a segregationist who once denied, in his own words, a “duly qualified” black applicant to Texas’ law school because of the man’s skin tone.
George Washington Littlefield and James Hogg are other names the group is looking to remove from campus.
Then there’s “The Eyes of Texas.”
The university fight song has connections both to Confederate commander Robert E. Lee and minstrel shows put on by the Texas Cowboys, a nearly century-old student organization.
“Somewhere between 50 and 60 Texas Cowboys every year put on blackface and did minstrelsy, a kind of satirical and comical variety show that they put on every year,” Gordon said.
“And the ‘Eyes of Texas are upon you’ are a take on Robert E. Lee’s famous words, ‘the Eyes of the South are upon you.’ ”
‘Time for action’
Texas has previously attempted to address issues surrounding some of the Confederate figures and racist policies in its history.
In 2010, the school removed the name of a former Ku Klux Klan leader from a dormitory and in 2015 removed a statue of former Confederate President Jefferson Davis.
In 2017, the school removed several more statutes of Confederate figures, including Lee.
Texas athletes have asked to have all of these issues addressed “through implementation or a plan for implementation at the start of the fall semester.” Though they will continue to work out and participate in all required team activities, without an official commitment they will “not be participating in the recruiting of incoming players or donor-related events.”
“So now it’s time for action, whether you’re starting off as educating yourself and really all ourselves,” Texas junior safety Caden Sterns said.
“I think action and unity are the next things that we really need to focus on because that’s what it’s going to take if you really want change to happen.”
