3 other officers charged Count against Chauvin upgraded to 2nddegree murder
The Dallas Morning News - 4 Jun 2020 - 1A - FROM WIRE REPORTS
MINNEAPOLIS — Minnesota Attorney General Keith Ellison on Wednesday upgraded charges against the former Minneapolis police officer who knelt on George Floyd’s neck and charged the other three officers at the scene with aiding and abetting murder.
The decision followed more than a week of attimes violent protests calling for tougher charges against former Minneapolis police Officer Derek Chauvin, who had pinned Floyd to the ground and held him there for nearly nine minutes.
Protesters also demanded the arrests of the three other nowformer officers who were present but failed to intervene.
An updated criminal complaint against Chauvin says his actions were a “substantial causal factor in Mr. Floyd losing consciousness, constituting substantial bodily harm, and Mr. Floyd’s death as well.” The unintentional seconddegree murder count carries a maximum penalty of 40 years in prison compared with 25 years for thirddegree murder.
“I believe the evidence available to us now supports the stronger charge of seconddegree murder,” Ellison said.
The complaints against the other officers accuse them of aiding and abetting Chauvin’s actions and of manslaughter.
Widely seen bystander video showing Chauvin pressing his knee into Floyd’s neck on May 25 has sparked protests nationwide and around the world against police brutality and discrimination.
Earlier Wednesday, Floyd’s son, Quincy Mason Floyd, 27, visited the site where his father died, kneeling among the flowers and posters.
“We want justice,” the son,
who lives in Texas, said while standing before a large painted angel now marking the spot.
“No man or woman should be without their fathers.”
All four officers were fired, and Chauvin was initially charged with thirddegree murder and seconddegree manslaughter.
The three other officers involved were not immediately
charged, spurring calls from protesters and Floyd’s family for them to also face criminal charges.
The unintentional seconddegree murder charge alleges that Chauvin caused Floyd’s death without intent while committing another felony offense, namely thirddegree assault.
For the other defendants — Thomas Lane, J. Kueng and Tou Thao — aiding and abetting is legally tantamount to committing the same acts as Chauvin, so they will face the same penalties if convicted.
The multiple charges against each defendant would give a jury more opportunity to find them guilty.
“George Floyd mattered.
He was loved, his family was important, his life had value, and we will seek justice for him and for you, and we will find it,” Ellison said during a news conference.
‘Deeply gratified’
Attorney Ben Crump tweeted that the Floyd family was “deeply gratified” by the new charges, calling them “a source of peace for George’s family in this difficult time.” He said Ellison told the family that his office will continue to investigate and upgrade charges against Chauvin if warranted.
Ellison said public pressure had no effect on his decision to file charges and acknowledged that winning a conviction against a police officer is difficult.
Also Wednesday, a full autopsy report of Floyd was released and provides several clinical details, including that Floyd had tested positive for COVID19.
The 20page report, released by the Hennepin County medical examiner’s office, was released with the family’s permission and after the coroner’s office released summary findings Monday that Floyd had a heart attack while being restrained by officers.
That report classified his death as a homicide.
The new report, by Chief Medical Examiner Andrew Baker, spelled out clinical details, including that Floyd had tested positive for COVID19 on April 3 but appeared asymptomatic.
The report also noted that Floyd’s lungs appeared healthy but that he had some narrowing of arteries in the heart.
The county’s earlier summary report had listed fentanyl intoxication and recent methamphetamine use under “other significant conditions” but not under “cause of death.” The full report’s footnotes noted that signs of fentanyl toxicity can include “severe respiratory depression” and seizures.
Crump earlier decried the autopsy summary report for ruling out asphyxia.
An autopsy commissioned by the Floyd family concluded that he died of asphyxiation due to neck and back compression.
Personnel records released by the city show Chauvin served as a military policeman in the Army in the late 1990s.
Since being hired as a police officer in 2001, he has been awarded two medals of valor.
The former officer, who had worked with the department since October 2001, had been disciplined for one incident during his tenure, despite being the subject of internal affairs investigations by the department at least 17 times.
Chauvin was reprimanded in 2008 for pulling a woman out of her car in 2007, frisking her and placing her in his squad car after he stopped her for speeding 10 mph over the limit.
His dashboard camera was not activated, and a report said he could have interviewed the woman while standing outside her car.
The other officers
According to internal records, Thao has been investigated at least six times by the department.
None of those investigations resulted in discipline, records show.
One case is pending.
Lane, 37, and Kueng, 26, joined the department in February 2019, and neither has any complaints on their files.
Lane previously worked as a correctional officer at the Hennepin County juvenile jail.
Kueng was a 2018 graduate of the University of Minnesota where he worked parttime on campus security.
Thao, a native Hmong speaker, joined the police force as a parttime community service officer in 2008 and was promoted to police officer in 2009.
On Wednesday at the memorial marking the spot where Floyd died, Suzie Hewitt, who grew up in the Twin Cities, knelt as she and others in the crowd put their arms around her mother, who sobbed on the curb.
“All of this frustration, sadness, anger — this is what black trauma looks like,” Hewitt said.
“But now people are coming together to address this issue.”
