Housing: In hard-hit New England, jobless fear losing their homes.
Across the six-state region, housing struggles offer a cautionary tale as government efforts to stave off financial ruin try to keep pace with the pandemic
Carrie Duran didn’t have to scrounge too much when her rent came due in April.
The 48yearold single mother covered the bill with the $1,200 federal stimulus check she received that month.
been cut dramatically.
She wasn’t receiving unemployment benefits in her home state of New Hampshire.
She had three kids to feed, a daughter with Down syndrome to support, a car payment that hounded her so much that creditors called her five times on Mother’s Day alone — an evergrowing list of responsibilities competing for her attention and her everdwindling bank account.
“You have to think about what is the most important thing,” Duran said, “and a roof over our head is the most important thing.”
As the coronavirus pandemic threatens to lapse late into the year, many families in New Hampshire and across the sixstate New England region are coming to a similar, scary realization: It’s never been easy to afford a home or apartment here, and it’s about to become even more difficult.
With unemployment skyrocketing — and some federal financial aid weeks away from running dry — millions of local residents newly find themselves at risk of prolonged financial hardship, perhaps even staring down the once-unfathomable prospect of homelessness.
Despite the U.S. government’s efforts to halt evictions and extend $3 trillion in aid, many say they fear falling behind on their rent or mortgage and lack the means to put off some of those payments until their bank accounts — and the broader economy — are in better shape.
The financial burdens have troubled not only local families but also economists and lawmakers, who see in the making a potential crisis more than a decade after a wave of foreclosures swept millions of Americans out of their homes.
In New England alone, roughly 380,000 homeowners and renters are at risk of falling behind about $540 million in payments each month, according to the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, which found the region is one of the hardest hit by the pandemic.
The Boston Fed cautioned that its numbers hinge on the availability of state and federal financial support, including the enhanced unemployment benefits and one-time stimulus checks Congress authorized in March.
Economists said the data offer a cautionary tale — for New England and the rest of the country — about the financial devastation on the horizon if the pandemic outpaces the U.S. government’s response.
“If we don’t see a dramatic resumption of employment, and we don’t see an extension of those unemployment insurance benefits, then the scenario quickly looks much closer to our worstcase scenario,” said Jeffrey P. Thompson, a vice president and economist at the Boston Fed.
Earlier this month, President Trump told Republican senators he wanted to allow the enhanced unemployment benefits to expire in July.
Without such aid, more than 1 million families in the New England region might have found their homes at risk, the Boston Fed previously found.
Duran, for her part, ultimately worked out an arrangement with the property managers overseeing Harriman Hill, a low-income housing community in Wolfeboro where she’s long lived.
She’d cover a fraction of the rent due on her three-bedroom place this month, then deal with the remainder later.
But Duran said she fears she may have no choice but to seek help again perhaps in June and July and August, adding to a growing financial burden that she knows someday is going to come due.
“T think I’m not the only one who’s going to be in this boat,” Duran said.
“We’re going to be playing catch-up for a long time.”
In New England, the economic carnage arrived almost as quickly as the novel coronavirus outbreak that caused it.
The unemployment rate among the six states in the region — Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Rhode Island and Vermont — surged immediately, later outpacing the national average, the Boston Fed found in a May report.
Roughly one-third of Rhode Island’s labor force sought unemployment benefits by midapril, leaving the small state with the country’s highest rate of joblessness at the time, federal labor data show.
In Vermont, the job cuts ravaged the local services industry, largely given the dramatic decline in tourism and hospitality.
These workers made up nearly 80 percent of the earliest claims for unemployment support in the state, according to U.S. indicators.
Nationwide, 36.5 million have sought unemployment checks since the pandemic began.
Yet three of the 10 states with the highest unemployment rates in the United States in the final week of April belonged to New England, the Labor Department found this month.
Experts say the job cuts have hit low-wage workers without college degrees the hardest, threatening their livelihoods most.
“It’s a depression for them.
It’s a recession for everyone else,” said Brian Kench, dean of the College of Business at the University of New Haven.
Many vulnerable families have benefited greatly from state and federal support.
Evictions and foreclosures largely are paused, and homeowners can postpone payments on certain mortgages, such as those backed by Fannie Mae.
Unemployed workers across the country have additional dollars of federal stimulus at their disposal.
The actions so far have helped stave off a historic foreclosure crisis, experts say.
In New Hampshire, for example, roughly 70 percent of mortgages are “federally connected some way,” said Dean Christon, the executive director of the New Hampshire Housing Finance Authority.
He said the extent to which federal lawmakers’ efforts benefit homeowners here and across the country ultimately will depend on how repayment options are implemented and enforced.
But renters increasingly represent a growing concern.
Some families may be able to postpone sending monthly checks — but only for so long.
Many renters simply may not earn enough money to catch up quickly on missed payments, especially if they are forced to pay them later in a lump sum at risk of eviction.
That puts a strain on the landlords who own those properties, adding to the potential for a housing crisis unless the government authorizes additional aid.
“If you’re a household trying to make the math work, it was already a tight budget before,” said Stefanie Coxe, the executive director of the Regional Housing Network of Massachusetts.
“Now, it’s even tighter.”
Outside Providence, Shanira Villafane had been saving for months, eagerly anticipating the day that she, her husband and their 9-year-old daughter could move out of a local shelter and into their own apartment.
She recently had banked her federal stimulus check to pay for the costs of the move, and Villafane enrolled in a Rhode Island program that provides housing assistance to low-income families.
But the coronavirus soon upended her plans.
Villafane, 26, said it quickly became hard to find reasonable apartments.
Not only that, she worried about her ability to afford them over the long term, especially after the grocery store where she works slashed her hours.
Taking on a second job wasn’t much of an option, either, as Villafane labored to help her daughter through the slog of home-school — all the while toiling to complete her own coursework for a GED.
That meant Villafane is stuck in limbo, she said, at least for the time being.
“God forbid my job shuts down,” she said.
“I want to stay where I’m at .. .
even if it’s driving me crazy here.”
The plight facing renters and homeowners recently has caught the attention of Washington, where Democratic lawmakers have put forward legislation authorizing $100 billion in new federal funds to help renters.
“This pandemic has shown us how vulnerable working families are to a single financial setback, and renters need relief now,” Sen. Sherrod Brown (D- Ohio), its chief author, said in a statement.
But the bill is caught up in a fierce back-and-forth between lawmakers about how best to respond to the coronavirus.
Many in the party, including top Trump administration officials, recently have signaled they would prefer to allow prior federal relief packages to run
their course before authorizing perhaps trillions of dollars in new funding, threatening for now to scuttle any new housing relief.
