» Poll says only about half of Americans would take vaccine.
Many cite safety and side effects as the biggest roadblocks
Houston Chronicle - 28 May 2020 - A1 - By Lauran Neergaard and Hannah Fingerhut
Only about half of Americans say they would get a COVID-19 vaccine if the scientists working furiously to create one succeed, a number that’s surprisingly low considering the effort
going into the global race for a vaccine.
1 =
But more people might eventually roll up their sleeves: The new poll from the Associated Press-NORC Center for Public Affairs Research found 31 percent simply weren’t sure if they’d get vaccinated.
Another 1 in 5 said they’d refuse.
Health experts already worry about the whiplash if vaccine promises like President Donald Trump’s goal of a 300 milliondose stockpile by January fail.
Only time and science will tell — and the new poll shows the public is indeed skeptical.
“It’s always better to underpromise and overdeliver,” said Dr. William Schaffner, an infectious disease specialist at Vanderbilt University Medical Center.
“The unexpected looms large and that’s why I think for any of these vaccines, we’re going to need a large safety database to provide the reassurance,” he added.
Among Americans who say
they wouldn’t get vaccinated, 7 in 10 worry about safety.
“T am not an anti-vaxxer,” said Melanie Dries, 56, of Colorado Springs, Colo.
But, “to get a COVID-19 vaccine within a year or two ... causes me to fear that it won’t be widely tested as to side effects.”
Dr. Francis Collins, who directs the National Institutes of Health, insists safety is the top priority.
The NIH is creating a master plan for testing the leading COVID-19 vaccine candidates in tens of thousands of people to prove they really work and are safe.
“T would not want people to think that we’ re cutting corners, because that would be a big mistake.
I think this is an effort to try to achieve efficiencies, but not to sacrifice rigor,” Collins said earlier this month.
“Definitely the worst thing that could happen is if we rush through a vaccine that turns out to have significant side effects,” Collins added.
Among those who want a vaccine, the AP-NORC poll found.
protecting themselves, their family and the community are the top reasons.
“T’m definitely going to get it,” said Brandon Grimes, 35, of Austin.
“As a father who takes care of his family, I think... it’s important for me to get vaccinated as soon as it’s available to better protect my family.”
And about 7 in 10 of those who would get vaccinated say life won’t go back to normal without a vaccine.
A site foreman for his family’s construction business, Grimes travels from house to house interacting with different crews, and said some of his coworkers also are looking forward to vaccination to minimize on-the-job risk.
The new coronavirus is most dangerous to older adults and people of any age who have chronic health problems such as diabetes or heart disease.
The poll found 67 percent of people 60 and older say they’d get vaccinated, compared with 40 percent who are younger.
And death counts suggest black and Hispanic Americans are more vulnerable to COVID-19 because of unequal access to health care and other factors.
Yet the poll found just 25 percent of African Americans and 37 percent of Hispanics would get a vaccine compared with 56 percent of whites.
Among people who don’t want a vaccine, about 4 in 10 say they’re concerned about catching COVID-19 from the shot.
But most of the leading vaccine candidates don’t contain the coronavirus itself, meaning they can’t cause infection.
And 3 in 10 who don’t want a vaccine don’t fear getting seriously ill from the coronavirus.
“There’s still a large amount of uncertainty around taking the vaccine,” said Caitlin Oppenheimer, who leads NORC’s public health research.
“There is a lot of opportunity to communicate with Americans about the value and the safety of a vaccine.”
