» Coronavirus rips into countries previously spared.
Houston Chronicle - 5 Jun 2020 - A1 - By Declan Walsh
CAIRO — For months, one enduring mystery of the coronavirus was why some of the world’s most populous countries, with rickety health systems and crowded slums, had managed to avoid the brunt of an outbreak that was burning through relatively affluent societies in Europe a
Now some of those countries are tumbling into the maw of the pandemic, and they are grappling with the likelihood that their troubles are only beginning.
Globally, known cases of the virus are growing faster than ever, with more than 100,000 new ones a day.
The surge is concentrated in densely populated, lowand middle-income countries across the Middle East, Latin America, Africa and South Asia.
Not only has it filled hospitals and cemeteries there, it has frustrated the hopes of leaders who thought they were doing everything right or who believed they might somehow escape the pandemic’s worst ravages.
“We haven’t seen any evidence that certain populations will be spared,” said Natalie Dean, an assistant professor of biostatistics at the University of Florida.
For those not yet affected, she said, “it’s a matter of when, not if.”
Several of the newly hit countries are led by strongmen and populists now facing a foe that cannot be neutralized with arrests or swaggering speeches.
In Egypt, where the rate of new confirmed infections doubled last week, the pandemic has created friction between President AbdelFattah el-Sissi and doctors who have revolted over a lack of protective equipment and training.
In Brazil, the total death toll surpassed 32,000 on Thursday, with 1,349 deaths in a single day, dealing a further blow to the populist president, Jair Bolsonaro, who has continued to minimize the threat.
“We are sorry for all the dead, but that’s everyone’s destiny,” he said Tuesday.
The upswing marks a new stage in the trajectory of the virus, away from Western countries that have settled into a grinding battle against an increasingly familiar adversary, toward corners of the globe where many hoped that hot weather, youthful populations or some unknown epidemiological factor might shield them from a scourge that has infected 6.5 million people and killed almost 400,000, over a quarter of them in the United States.
Although Egypt’s 30,000 cases are far fewer than those of several other Arab countries — Saudi Arabia has three times as many — it has by far the highest death toll in the region, and its infection rate is soaring.
Last Sunday the government recorded 1,500 new cases, up from about 700 just three days earlier.
The next day the minister for higher education and scientific research warned that
Egypt’s true number of cases could be over 117,000.
Last week, el-Sissi railed on Twitter against unspecified “enemies of the state” who attacked government efforts to combat the virus.
Earlier, Egypt’s public prosecutor warned that anyone spreading “false news” about the coronavirus faced up to five years of imprisonment.
Doctors at several hospitals said they had been threatened by el-Sissi’s feared security apparatus for daring to complain.
Experts say that el-Sissi’s obsession with showing that he is beating the pandemic may have encouraged some Egyptians to drop their guard.
Unfortunately, such heedlessness can have dire consequences.
In March, Mohammed Nady, 30, posted a video to Facebook dismissing the virus as an American-engineered conspiracy.
A few weeks later, he posted a second video from the hospital announcing that he had contracted the coronavirus.
A third clip showed him in bed, struggling to breathe.
“I am dying,” he said.
“I am dying.” He died in April, three days before his father also died from the disease.
