Handful in DFW area open at 25% capacity
opened Friday.
Here’s how things went.
ROANOKE — Summertime isn’t summertime in North Texas without a trip to the local waterpark on a hot day, and families finally got a taste of the season Friday as water parks were allowed to open with limited capacity and new rules.
Gov.
Greg Abbott said Tuesday that water parks can open at 25% capacity, although only a few local parks turned on their slides and powered up the lazy rivers on Friday.
Hawaiian Falls in Roanoke, which originally was scheduled to open Memorial Day weekend, was ready.
The park never reached the allowed attendance threshold Friday, although a long line of seasonticket holders waited outside when the gates opened at 9 a.m.
Toddlers splashed in a multilevel play structure with jets of water, slides and more.
Older children hauled bright blue inner tubes up to the top of the Pipeline Plunge and the Beach Blaster.
Teens floated along the lazy river.
Parents lounged at picnic tables, keeping an eye on kids in the wave pool.
Guests like Katie Ortiz of Euless arrived early to get a spot in the park before it hit 25% capacity.
Ortiz said her family has been cooped up in an apartment and had been checking the Hawaiian Falls website and calling to find out when the park would reopen for the summer.
“Tt’s Texas.
It’s hot.
This is good,” Ortiz said.
“Where else could you go to stay cool?”
The water park has had to make some changes to help keep guests healthy and safe amid the ongoing pandemic.
Tables are
spread farther apart.
Life jackets are sprayed with sanitizer before and after each use.
There’s no evidence that COVID19 can spread through pool water, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, especially if pool owners properly disinfect their pools with chlorine or bromine.
But social distancing norms should still be observed at the pool.
For water parks like Hawaiian Falls, that means spreadout tables, more space between people in line for the big slides, and fewer people crammed into the wave pool.
Masks aren’t required for guests, since they should not be worn in the water.
But lifeguards and other Hawaiian Falls employees wore masks throughout the park.
Mike Friscia, senior vice president for operations at the park, said families were able to spread out more with the required lower turnout, and kept their distance from each other.
Stickers on the ground showed where to stand in lines, and most guests followed those recommendations.
“The guests are pretty conditioned,” Friscia said.
“To me, it’s been feeling like a normal water park day.”
Becca Hobbs of Keller said she checked the park’s new COVID19 policies before bringing her children.
Still, she said, it was a welcome break to get out of the house.
“Once you see all the regulations, I felt safe coming,” Hobbs said.
“We’re excited to get back to the normal routine.”
By midday, many of the families with younger children were pulling out towels, packing up bags and heading out of the park.
One mom ushered her daughter — a toddler with a rainbow swimsuit and soaked pigtails — back toward their picnic bench.
“Awww,” the toddler shouted, flailing her arms in exasperated discontent.
“I wanna stay!” “We can come back tomorrow or Sunday,” her mother said.
The toddler marched forward, disappointed.
But the season is just warming up.
Even though it’s different this year, there’s plenty of time for more swimming, splashing and sliding at the water park before summer is gone again.
