Police chase ended in death Austinarea man with heart ailment died while in custody
The Dallas Morning News - 10 Jun 2020 - 1A - By TONY PLOHETSKI
AUSTIN — Javier Ambler was driving home from a friendly poker game in the early hours of March 28, 2019, when a Williamson County sheriff’s deputy noticed that he failed to dim the headlights of his SUV to oncoming traffic.
Twentyeight minutes later, the black father of two sons lay dying on a North Austin street after deputies held him down and used Tasers on him four times while a crew from A&E’S reality show Live PD filmed.
Ambler, a 40yearold former postal worker, repeatedly pleaded for mercy, telling deputies he had congestive heart failure and couldn’t breathe.
He cried, “Save me,”
before deputies deployed a final shock.
His death never made headlines.
Now, after months of questioning and requests for information from the Austin Americanstatesman and KVUETV, recently released documents and police video shed light on that fatal night at a time when the nation confronts injustice against minorities by law enforcement.
Protests have roiled the country since the Memorial Day death of George Floyd, a black man pinned under the knee of a white Minneapolis police officer for nearly nine minutes as he lost consciousness and never regained it.
Communities throughout Central Texas have called for police reforms and transparency amid the racial unrest and the recent death of Michael Ramos, an unarmed black Hispanic
man killed by Austin police.
The details of Ambler’s deadly encounter with Williamson County deputies, which came to light only because of ongoing media pressure, bring intensified focus on the need for accountability among law enforcement agencies.
Ambler’s death also renews scrutiny on a suburban agency that has been under fire for more than a year, largely because of its relationship with the reality TV show.
Critics of Williamson County Sheriff Robert Chody say he has chosen cable show stardom over public safety.
They also worry that the presence of TV cameras leads deputies to forsake prudent policing for dramatic television.
The deputies’ decisions to chase and repeatedly use their Tasers on a man who simply failed to dim his lights prompts questions about the agency’s practice of pursuing drivers for minor crimes.
“It is of very serious concern to any of us who are in law enforcement that the decision to engage in that chase was driven by more of a need to provide entertainment than to keep Williamson County citizens safe,” said Travis County District Attorney Margaret Moore.
15-month investigation
Some 15 months after Ambler’s death, Moore’s civil rights division is still investigating the incident.
After questioning from an AmericanStatesman reporter, she said her office plans to present the case to a grand jury.
Investigators say Chody and Live PD producers have repeatedly stonewalled their efforts to obtain evidence or interviews with the officers involved.
Chody said Monday that because of the ongoing criminal investigation into what happened, he is unable to comment on Ambler’s death.
Ambler’s parents still have few answers about their son’s death.
Until last week, they knew only that he died in police custody.
Reporters informed them he was chased after a minor traffic violation.
“He’s dead.
How?” Ambler’s mother, Maritza, sobbed in a recent interview.
“I can’t have any closure because I need to know.”
She said she has been plagued by nightmares that her son met the same tragic fate as Floyd.
“T woke up, and I wasn’t able to see,” Maritza Ambler said.
“But he came to me and he wanted to tell me.
He wanted to show me what happened to him.”
As Deputy J.J. Johnson, who is regularly featured on Live PD , patrolled the quiet suburban roads just north of Austin last March, a film crew rode along with him.
When Ambler passed with his brights on at 1:23 a.m., the deputy turned his car around and flipped on the flashing lights.
Ambler didn’t stop.
Johnson gave chase.
For the next 22 minutes, the two vehicles sped across highways and onto neighborhood streets.
As he drove, Johnson narrated for the TV crew, telling them what he thought was going on in Ambler’s mind.
As they crossed into Travis County, Austin officers were instructed not to get involved in the pursuit because they are allowed to chase only dangerous criminals.
Ambler smashed his Honda Pilot into stationary objects four times before crashing a final time near East St. Johns and Bethune avenues, just east of Interstate 35 north of downtown
Johnson, who had no backup at the time, drew his gun and ordered Ambler to get out of his car, raise his hands and get on the ground.
Ambler, a 400pound former football player, got out and showed his hands.
Johnson, who is black and about half Ambler’s size, holstered his gun and pulled out his Taser.
“Get down!” Johnson repeated several times.
When Ambler appeared to turn toward his car door, Johnson used his Taser, according to an internal investigative report the Statesman obtained under the Texas Public Information Act.
Ambler fell on one knee, rolled onto his stomach and acted as though he was trying to stand.
“You'll get it again,” Johnson shouted.
Backup Deputy Zachary Camden, who is white and was also accompanied by a Live PD crew, arrived and shoved his Taser into Ambler’s upper back.
As the struggle continued, officers used a Taser on Ambler a third time, though the report said it was unclear which officer deployed his weapon.
An Austin police officer arrived on the scene as the officers struggled to put handcuffs on Ambler.
Body camera video from that officer captured the final minutes of Ambler’s life.
Deputies yell at Ambler to lay on his stomach and put his hands behind his back.
One presses a Taser into his upper back.
“I have congestive heart failure,” Ambler says.
“I have congestive heart failure.
I can’t breathe.”
As the deputies scream orders, Ambler, between gasps, tells them he’s trying to follow their commands.
Another four times he tells the deputies he can’t breathe.
“T am not resisting,” Ambler cries.
“Sir, I can’t breathe ... please ... please.”
The deputies, who are on top of Ambler, continue yelling at him to put his arms behind his back.
“Save me,” Ambler cries.
“Do what we’re asking you to do!” a deputy yells.
“T can’t,” Ambler says, the last words the video captures from him just before one of the deputies deploys his Taser a fourth and final time at 1:47 a.m.
Ambler’s hands go limp, and the deputies place handcuffs around his wrists.
Moments later, they realized he was unconscious and his pulse had stopped.
Deputies performed CPR for four minutes until medics arrived.
Medics and doctors at Dell Seton Medical Center worked for 50 minutes to keep Ambler alive.
He was pronounced dead at 2:37 a.m.
Homicide ruling
By sunrise, several officers, including Chody, were at the scene.
Chody tweeted to his social media followers at 5:12 a.m.: “At the conclusion of a vehicle pursuit involving WCSO and APD, [an] in custody death occurred.
Both agencies are conducting a parallel investigation.
This is an active investigation, therefore, no other information is available at this time.”
A deathincustody report filed with the Texas attorney general’s office — a procedure required anytime a person dies in police custody — said Ambler did not attempt to, nor did
he assault deputies; he did not verbally threaten others nor attempt to get control of any officers’ weapons.
The most serious charge he would have faced was evading arrest, a lowlevel felony with a maximum of 10 years in prison, the report said.
Protocols that Chody put in place on Feb. 28, 2020, say a car chase is justified only when a deputy believes that a person has committed a crime “for which there is an immediate need for apprehension.” The department’s pursuit policy from last year was not immediately available.
Williamson County Sheriff ’s Department internal affairs investigators concluded in a report that deputies did nothing wrong and had not violated the agency’s pursuit or useofforce policies.
There is no indication in the report that the deputies faced any action against them or were forced to take time off because of the incident.
Ambler’s death was ruled a homicide, according to the report made to the state attorney general’s office, which noted that the homicide could have been “justifiable.” An autopsy showed he died of congestive heart failure and hypertensive cardiovascular disease associated with morbid obesity “in combination with forcible restraint.”
