Top state Republicans Bexar County chairwoman shared George Floyd conspiracy theory
called on a Bexar County party chairwoman to step down after sharing a conspiracy theory.
AUSTIN — Top Texas Republican leaders on Thursday called on Bexar County GOP Chairwoman Cynthia Brehm to resign for spreading a George Floyd conspiracy theory.
Gov.
Greg Abbott and U.S. Sen. John Cornyn said it’s time for Brehm, who late last month suggested that the coronavirus was a Democratic hoax, to go.
Brehm told Spectrum San Antonio, the cable TV provider in Bexar County, that she posted the message at the urging of a black conservative activist who’s a friend.
She said she has no intention of resigning.
On her Facebook page Wednesday, Brehm advanced a discredited conspiracy theory that Floyd’s death while handcuffed by Minneapolis police last week, with his neck held under the knee of one officer for more than eight minutes, was staged to damage President Donald Trump’s standing with black voters.
“These comments are disgusting and have no place in the Republican Party or in public discourse,” John Wittman, Abbott’s communications director, told the Austin AmericanStatesman on Thursday.
“Cynthia Brehm should immediately resign her position as chair of the Bexar County Republican Party.”
Shortly thereafter, Cornyn’s campaign said in a written statement, “Senator Cornyn shares Governor Abbott’s belief that Cynthia Brehm should resign.”
According to the Americanstatesman, U.S. Rep. Chip Roy, Raustin, and Travis County Republican Chairman Matt Mackowiak also said Brehm should resign.
“She has been an embarrassment for two years,” Mackowiak tweeted.
Late Thursday, former Speaker Joe Straus, Rsan Antonio, tweeted that Brehm is “unfit” for partisan or other office “due to her long history of making racist and inflammatory statements, peddling conspiracy theories and bringing embarrassment upon Bexar County Republicans.”
On her Facebook page — in a post that subsequently was removed but not until after Gilbert Garcia, a columnist with the San Antonio Expressnews, captured it in a screenshot — Brehm speculated that Floyd’s death was staged because Trump has been gaining some traction among black voters.
Though all four Minneapolis officers involved in the incident have now been charged with crimes, Brehm mused that one officer might be missing.
The whole affair “has the smell of MK Ultra activation.”
MK Ultra is a reference to CIA mindcontrol experiments that were conducted between 1953 and 1973.
Later Thursday, Abbott also called on the Nueces County GOP chairman, Jim Kaelin, to resign after he shared the Facebook post about Floyd’s death being staged, the Corpus Christi Callertimes reported.
Kaelin, who is a former longtime sheriff of the county, shared the
post on his Facebook page on May 29.
Kaelin didn’t immediately return requests for comment to the Callertimes.
The unsubstantiated theory that Floyd’s death was staged was the subject of a PolitiFact, published Friday, that said a similar social media post had been “flagged as part of Facebook’s efforts to combat false news and misinformation on its News Feed,” and that it had been “shared thousands of times and copypasted by other users.”
