Chaos amid curfew
Dozens of demonstrators arrested atop Dallas’ Margaret Hunt Hill Bridge
The Dallas Morning News - 2 Jun 2020 - 1A - By TOM STEELE, NIC GARCIA, JOSEPH HOYT, CASSANDRA JARAMILLO, NATALY KEOMOUNGKHOUN, KEVIN KRAUSE and LAVENDRICK SMITH Staff Writers
Earlier, police chief vows: ‘If you want to work together, you all have a seat at the table’
Downtown Dallas was empty of protesters Monday evening, the second night a 7 p.m. curfew was in effect for the city center and surrounding neighborhoods.
But before the night had ended, police had conducted mass arrests atop the Margaret Hunt Hill Bridge, west of downtown, after hundreds of protesters marched on the highway.
After law enforcement made people leave public areas Sunday and took several dozen demonstrators into custody, most protesters the next evening decamped to the Frank Crowley courthouse just west of downtown — and just outside the curfew’s boundary.
Kasandra Mendoza, a 21yearold Lewisville woman, walked down Commerce Street with a Kendrick Lamar song blasting from her backpack.
“Every day, there’s always something new.
It’s either false accusations, it’s killings, it’s shootings — it’s just always something out here,” Mendoza said.
“You’ve just got to take a stand.”
As she made her way to the courthouse, Mendoza held a sign that said “Latinos for Black Lives Matter.”
She said it’s important to make sure all races join the fight against social injustice.
“This involves everybody,” she said.
“We have to stand up for [black Americans] .
... We have to help protect them.”
Along the protesters’ route, Allie Stensrude, 37, Ellis Thomas, 33, and Abby Evans, 37, handed out protein bars and bottles of water.
“We're trying to be allies and do what
we could do while still respecting the curfew,” Stensrude said.
“We just wanted to be here and support in any way we could.”
‘Shows the urgency’
Minutes before 7 o’clock, the crowd outside the courts building chanted, “You can’t stop the revolution.”
Confusion briefly spread among protesters about whether police would make mass arrests.
An unmarked Dallas police squad car drove by, announcing “We do not want to arrest you” as the curfew approached.
But Sgt.
Warren Mitchell, a police spokesman, said the courthouse was outside the curfew zone.
“This is what democracy looks like,” said Dominique Alexander, the founder of the Next Generation Action Network, pointing at the crowd.
Alexander said he moved the demonstration after law enforcement blocked downtown streets, impeding protesters’ route to Dallas police headquarters.
Across Riverfront Boulevard, on the border of the curfew zone, a line of state troopers and the National Guard watched the protest.
After about half an hour, they backed off.
When Zairia Buchanan, 20, took the microphone she held a large canvas in one hand.
On it, in acrylic paint and black brush pen, she had recreated the image of Minneapolis police Officer Derek Chauvin with his knee on Floyd’s neck — with Chauvin depicted as a smirking pig.
Buchanan started the painting immediately after she saw the footage of Floyd’s death.
She was angry and heartbroken, and she brushed with a sense of purpose: She wants action, swiftly.
“This piece shows the urgency behind what happened to George Floyd and the justice we want for him,” she said.
Dallas City Council member Adam Bazaldua, who represents South Dallas, said it was important for him to witness firsthand the law enforcement response to Monday’s protest.
“There’s challenges with implementing a curfew with such short notices, and that should be remembered when enforced,” he said.
“I was very displeased that so many people were arrested solely based on violating curfew” Sunday evening.
Shortly after 8:30 p.m., the protesters prayed and then began marching north on Riverfront, pausing to take a knee before continuing onto the Margaret Hunt Hill Bridge.
Authorities allowed them to go up a ramp onto the westbound lanes of the bridge, then deployed smoke to keep them from continuing into the Trinity Groves area.
Many of the demonstrators began walking back toward the Riverfront Boulevard ramp, but some remained on the bridge.
More law enforcement at the east end of the bridge sandwiched in the protesters, and authorities began detaining dozens of them, including Alexander, on charges of obstructing a highway.
‘A seat at the table’
Outside Dallas police headquarters, in an area subject to the curfew, police Chief U. Reneé Hall addressed a smaller group of demonstrators.
“Tf you want to work together, you all have a seat at the table,” she said.
But she implored the protesters to leave if they didn’t want to be arrested.
Most listened, but three people were taken into custody, police said.
A group of several other people was arrested nearby later in the evening.
Debbie Kim, 42, of Rockwall said there was no trouble at the protest.
“Everybody’s been extremely peaceful and very loving,” she said.
“It’s like a little family out here.”
Activist Carlos Quintanilla, among those who were outside police headquarters, said officers were prepared to escalate the situation.
“They had their weapons.
They came out ready to attack peaceful protesters.
Chief Hall came and said, ‘I want to work with you,’ ” he said.
“Well, it’s too late.”
‘Really upset’
Hours before crowds were expected to gather, Robb Base stood on the corner of Field and Main streets for a few minutes, silently waving a sign.“‘i woke up really upset,” said the 24yearold, who is black.
“I looked at my 1yearold this morning and asked ‘How could someone hate my son?’ ”
Base, along with his sister Kaelyn Home, 21, and cousin Vicki Valencourt, 29, came downtown anticipating a crowd, but they found only a few other protesters.
Aman yelled from his car, “Where is it going down?” They shrugged.
On Commerce Street, members of Elev8ed Elites Dance and Cheer Company, a South Dallas group, posed in front of a boardedup Starbucks.
Shantrail White, the dance company’s director, said she brought the girls out to witness history.
Kennedy Williams, 11, said she was sad and confused about the violence.
“T don’t understand why people are killing people just because of the color of their skin,” she said.
“It shouldn’t have to go down this way.
It’s amazing how people treat people.
I don’t get it.”
In Frisco, hundreds of people marched peacefully through the streets as police lined up along the march, which occupied the entire right lane of Eldorado Parkway from Rogers Road to FM423.
One of the protesters, Yameca Young, 44, said she wanted her 10yearold son to understand the reason everyone was marching was to ensure justice for future generations.
“It is amazing that a suburb like Frisco is fighting for justice toward black people,” she said.
“I think it takes an entire village to fight against injustice, and only Dallas or Fort Worth wouldn’t be able to send the message properly.
We needed to extend to the suburbs and get the entire community to stand together.”
Many of the protesters were teenagers and young adults who said it’s important for young people to voice their opinions.
“It’s imperative that the youth of America are actively participating in reshaping our society to one that is truly equal for all,” said Saam Shahandeh, an 18yearold graduate of Lebanon Trail School.
In Arlington, more than 100 people gathered on the Center Street bridge over Interstate 20 for a peaceful protest.
"There's good cops and bad cops,” Zardeh said.
“We just need the bad cops to go.”
Many motorists honked in support as they passed below.
At one point, two cars stopped and those inside got out to show their support, causing traffic to back up.
Police arrived and cleared the situation.
Police also closed the bridge to keep protesters safe.
Zardeh said that as a Muslim, she understands what it’s like to face challenges because of your ethnicity.
That’s why it was important to show up and protest violence against black people.
“‘We’ve got to focus on one race because they are the ones that are being hurt,” she said.
“We just want everybody to come together, and we just want peace."
Use of force by police
The Dallas Police Department said it’s investigating two cases of police use of force that led to serious injuries and hospitalizations Sunday.
Police said the internal affairs unit will review the incidents, both of which occurred on Main Street: one about 4 p.m. near Pegasus Plaza and the other about 7 p.m. near Bank of America Plaza.
Two people were seriously injured, requiring hospitalization and surgery, but no further details, including the identities of the people involved, were released.
“We are currently waiting for the victims to recover in order to garner all the facts surrounding these incidents,” police said in a written statement.
“We take these matters very seriously.
Rest assured, there will be a full investigation and we will continue to keep the public informed.”
Fort Worth
Fort Worth leaders issued a curfew for the entire city beginning at 8 p.m. Monday after a peaceful protest grew tense the previous night.
Several hundred demonstrators and a line of police engaged in a drawnout standoff Sunday night on the West Seventh Street bridge.
SWAT officers began using smoke canisters and flash bangs to disperse the crowd after police said some in the crowd began throwing frozen water bottles at officers.
Police then used tear gas on the remaining protesters, who the department said continued to throw objects and set off fireworks.
Police said three officers were injured.
The curfew lasts nightly from 8 p.m. to 6 a.m. through Thursday, and people who violate it could be fined up to $500.
First responders, the media, people going to and from work, those seeking medical attention and anyone fleeing danger are exempt.
