Area businesses close over looting concerns
Amid fallout after killing of George Floyd, police urge residents in southwest suburbs to stay home
Daily Southtown - 1 Jun 2020 - 1 - By Bill Jones and Paul Eisenberg
Orland Park police alerted residents Sunday that many of the village’s stores near Orland Square, as well as near the intersection of 159th Street and LaGrange Road, had closed amid growing concerns about demonstrations and looting following “social media chatter” threatening the southwest suburbs.
The village of Tinley Park also recommended residents stay home while notifying some businesses via automated calls that it is recommended they close for the day.
Thornton police put out a similar request to businesses and residents via Facebook, noting “protests that (are) occurring in numerous areas of the south suburbs.”
Orland Park police posted about 1:20 p.m. to Facebook that many cities across the United States have seen demonstrations regarding the death of George Floyd in Minneapolis during an arrest, with some of those demonstrations turning violent over the past two days.
Similar events were occurring near Orland Square and 159th/ LaGrange, according to the post, though Sgt.
Wayne Lee said no demonstrations were taking place as of 2:35 p.m. “We're just actively trying to prevent any incidents,” Lee said, noting police are preparing because of a social media post suggesting activity in the area as well as incidents in nearby towns.
Later in the day, police announced three arrests had been made.
Orland Park Mayor Keith Pekau confirmed that includes a “very heavy presence” — with most of the police department working — near the mall in response to “all kinds of chatter on social media.”
What the village has seen thus far is not organized, with “no major incidents,” Pekau said Sunday afternoon.
Many stores closed for the day, though “some have stayed open,” Pekau said.
People were encouraged to avoid the mall area, as well as the intersection of 159th Street and LaGrange Road because
of police activity.
“We're just out there protecting life and property with the presence,” Pekau said.
The village of Tinley Park also posted a request to Facebook that residents remain in their homes because of protesters and “potential civil unrest,” and later issued a curfew from 8 p.m. Sunday to 6 a.m. Monday.
The village said first responders were dealing with “multiple incidents across the village.” The Open Bottle in Tinley Park posted on Facebook it was closing for the day after receiving an automated call that suggested all businesses close for the day.
Pat Carr, Tinley Park’s assistant village manager/ director of emergency management and 911 communications, said the municipality is focusing its prevention efforts on big box retailers and asking residents to avoid those areas, in particular.
“We are preparing based on social media threats to the south suburban area and law enforcement information,” Carr said.
Oak Forest police had a large presence at the Eagle Sports Range on 159th Street, blocking access to the lot of the building which houses a shooting range.
Likewise Markham police with lights activated were monitoring gas stations at Dixie Highway and 159th Street.
Country Club Hills police likewise were present at service stations along 183rd Street.
In Homewood, all businesses were shut down about mid-afternoon, according to an email message sent by the village just after 3 p.m.
Police vehicles were stationed at the entrances in the village’s main shopping areas, including those along Halsted and 183rd streets.
Cones blocked access from Halsted Street to Ridge Road, one of the main routes into the heart of the village.
Southbound traffic on Halsted was blocked at the overpass at Interstate 80, though as of 5:30 p.m. northbound traffic lanes were open.
According to the village email sent Sunday afternoon, “Due to looting and vandalism in surrounding communities, the Chief of Police is recommending people stay home.
Businesses in Homewood are closed as a safeguard.
There is no immediate danger.
These are precautionary measures to ensure the safety of our community members.”
Meanwhile, it was graduation day for seniors at Homewood-Flossmoor High School, and amid a significant police presence, especially at businesses, other vehicles were driving around sporting balloons in red and white, the schools colors, and other decorations.
Frankfort police had closed entrances to shopping areas such as Hickory Creek Marketplace at La Grange and La Porte roads, though an officer blocking one the drives in his squad car said it was precautionary and there had not been any incident.
Frankfort police put out a statement saying there were reports of large groups of protesters in several suburban areas and that they were asking residents to remain at home.
In Calumet City, police had closed all streets near River Oaks mall.
Traffic was allowed west on 159th Street, but eastbound traffic was blocked at Greenwood Avenue.
Hammond, Indiana Mayor Thomas McDermott said the River Oaks area was in a “state of emergency” in a post on his Facebook page.
“As a precautionary measure, in order to protect the City of Hammond and it’s residents, I have ordered shut all entrances to our city from the west until tomorrow morning at the earliest,” he posted Sunday afternoon on his Facebook page.
