Norman protest begins before meeting
NORMAN — Protesters gathered in Andrews Park on Tuesday evening to denounce racism and police brutality before taking their demands for justice and accountability across the street to City Hall.
“We cannot at the same time prioritize public health and policing,” Sarah Warm ker, a member of Norman Citizens for Racial Justice, told an en ergized group of about 200 people.
“They are mutually exclusive.”
Dozens holding signs and chanting“ No justice, no peace, no racist police,” then interrupted a packed City Council meeting, where they planned to address demands that include defunding the Norman Police Department by investing in proven alternatives to policing that support increased racial equity and equitable access to social services.
Mayor Breea Clark, who met with members of NC4RJ prior to the council meeting,
waited a couple of minutes for the protesters to line the back of the room before welcoming them and then politely asking them to wait their turn.
Demonstrators were not expected to address the council until later in the evening.
NCAR] is also asking the city to demilitarize the police department by ending the use of tear gas and mace.
Other demands include police department transparency and accountability, and “justice for Marconia Kessee and other victims of the NPS.”
Keesee, 35, died in 2018 after being found unresponsive in a jail cell two hours after his arrest at a Norman hospital.
The medical examiner later ruled his death accidental, and related to drug toxicity.
Protester Bridget Burns said the Norman Police Department and police departments across the country are not “meeting the needs of the community” or“continuing to endanger the community.”
“When we say ‘defund the police department,' we mean redirecting funds to social programs, to social workers to social services to mental health professionals, so that people who are having mental breakdowns are not shot by police,” Burns said.
The group also seeks to to eliminate “the unjust and disproportionately racist policing of children in Norman Public Schools” by ending the district's school resource officer pro“We do not need police officers in our schools,” Burns said.
“Money that funds that program could put more social workers in our schools to connect students to the resources that they need, more counselors in our schools to deal with different behavioral needs of the students.
We don't need police officers being called on elementary school children.” Tuesday's protest and others like it across the
country stemmed from the killing of George Floyd, an unarmed black man, by a Minneapolis police officer
