City criticizes show by federal law enforcement; demonstrators relocate
Federal authorities drew a new line in the Washington streets Wednesday, pushing protesters away from the park near the White House that has been at the center of demonstrations for days.
For the first time, rows of military personnel stood face-to-face with the crowd, with no physical barriers separating them.
The decision to eliminate access to Lafayette Square caused protesters to spread out during the day, moving to other areas such as President Trump’s downtown hotel and the U.S. Capitol.
The sixth day of protests, which had a lighter feel with musical moments, followed a day of relatively peaceful demonstrations, with protesters rebuking those who wanted to hurl bottles, or abuse, at authorities.
By nightfall, a giant group was stacked up in front of the military lines on 16th Street for two blocks.
Just before 10 p.m. there was a brief moment of tension, and many of the protesters left and marched toward the Capitol.
But no clashes were reported, and the District’s 11 p.m. curfew passed with no replay of Monday’s sudden assault, when smoke, flash explosives and pepper ball projectiles were used to eject the demonstrators from the area.
The increased federal response Wednesday frustrated both D.C. officials and crowds that gathered to protest the police-involved killing of George Floyd in Minneapolis.
D.C. police were not involved in the showdown, and said they weren’t even entirely aware of what agencies were now patrolling their city.
Asia Horne and Haley Mahon, in the city for their fifth day of protests on Wednesday afternoon, said they felt they had walked into an unrecognizable version of downtown, with police and military personnel seemingly on every sidewalk and barring every intersection.
When they tried to march with hundreds of others to the Lincoln Memorial, they found
that it had been converted into something akin to a military fortress, guarded by immense ranks of law enforcement.
“T’ve only lived here three years, but I did think the nation’s capital was supposed to be more open,” said Mahon, 21.
“These national landmarks are supposed to be open to the people.”
Mayor Muriel E. Bowser (D) and other city leaders also pushed back against the Trump administration’s response.
District leaders were unhappy with the expanded presence of federal law enforcement agencies and National Guard troops, many of whom did not have visible identification.
Some refused to say where they were from.
On Wednesday night, one front line of soldiers acknowledged that they were Utah National Guard members.
“We should all be concerned about who is giving the orders,” Bowser said at a news conference.
At midafternoon, the Minnesota attorney general announced an elevated murder charge against the officer seen with his knee on the neck of Floyd last week, and charges against the three other officers at the scene of Floyd’s arrest.
Authorities were waiting to see whether the developments lowered the temperature of protests, which proceeded with fullthroated intensity around Washington earlier in the day.
At 4 p.m., a crowd of about 1,000 protesters marched through the city’s downtown neighborhood, stopping in front of Trump International Hotel.
There, they all took a knee, blocking the intersection at Pennsylvania Avenue and 12th Street NW, as they chanted “Black Lives Matter” and “F--Trump!” The hotel appeared empty, with a couple of firstfloor windows smashed in.
With access to Lafayette Square blocked off, a man who would identify himself only as Mo said it would make sense for the president’s hotel to become the new focal point of demonstrations.
“We need to send a message,” he said, as the chants of more people marching up Pennsylvania Avenue echoed in the distance.
“He ain’t hearing us.”
Chef José Andrés stood handing water and sandwiches to the marchers.
“Cheese sandwich?” he asked as people walked by, sharing thin baguettes out of a Jaleo bag.
“I am a bad thrower and you are a worse catcher,” he told one protester who dropped his water bottle on the ground.
For the first time Wednesday, protesters could not get near Lafayette Square, the twoblocklong expanse directly in front of the White House.
On Tuesday, federal authorities erected a ninefoot chain-link fence around the park, which created a 30-yard separation of demonstrators from Park Police, National Guard units and federal officers packing the site.
The separation led to an uneventful night after Monday’s chaos, as District police chose not to enforce the city’s 7 p.m. curfew, and the federal authorities took no aggressive actions.
But on Wednesday, federal officials established roadblocks with hulking military vehicles in a oneblock perimeter in all directions around the park.
The action put heavily armed officers closer to the protesters with nothing to separate them.
Two rows of soldiers in camouflage uniforms and riot gear stood shoulder-to-shoulder on 16th Street NW, where protesters had fled chemical gas and flash-bomb grenades days before, and the line at times included Federal Bureau of Prisons and Guard personnel.
Some
carried stinger rubber ball grenades, which have been used to disperse crowds.
Others grasped pepper spray and what looked like grenade launchers for smoke explosives.
Angelique Medley, 21, was in the front row of protesters, shouting “This has to stop!” Medley said none of the officers replied.
“T came for my dad — a black man who lived through the civil rights era,” she said.
“He taught me to challenge authority, except his.”
On Wednesday morning, after a night in which there were no clashes at Lafayette Square and 19 arrests citywide, mostly for violating the curfew, Bowser shifted the curfew from 7 p.m. to 11 p.m.
‘We have allowed peaceful demonstrations every night,” she said.
“What we are concerned about are people who are not peaceful and destroying our city.”
On a sunny afternoon, people lay facedown near ornate fountains at the east front of the Capitol, hands held behind their backs as though restrained, as Floyd was before he died.
At noon, hundreds stood in the rain at the Capitol chanting “Justice now!” and “I can’t breathe!”
Asad Caicee, 18, had once again made the trip from the Maryland suburbs to protest the president.
But when he approached Lafayette Square, he saw that the street was blocked off with police officers and military vehicles, making it impossible for him to even see the White House.
So he went with the group to protest in front of the Trump International Hotel on Pennsylvania Avenue.
“It’s tyranny,” he said.
“Our ability to protest is being violated with these blockades.”
Numerous federal agencies and Guard members from some states have deployed around the city.
In one case, federal officers expanded a White House perimeter as far north as H Street NW.
Peter Newsham, the D.C. police chief, said he was not given advance notice of the operation.
On Wednesday, the Ellipse was blocked off, as were 17th Street and Pennsylvania Avenue NW.
Both Newsham and Bowser also criticized the deployment of a helicopter, which hovered over protesters on Monday night and sent glass and other debris flying.
“It was a potentially very dangerous scare tactic that was meant to intimidate D.C. residents,” Bowser said.
“It is wholly inappropriate in urban settings.”
The U.S. Park Police, who have jurisdiction over Lafayette Square and participated in the Monday sweep against protesters, have put two officers on administrative duty as the agency reviews their interaction with Australian reporters, acting Chief Gregory T. Monahan said in a statement.
The two reporters from 7News were live on-air Monday when they were struck by police in riot gear at a protest by the White House, prompting Australia’s Prime Minister Scott Morrison to request an investigation.
Such conflict was replaced by music in many places, including at the Capitol during the day, and on 16th Street in the evening.
At 8:30 p.m., with thousands still gathered as close as they could get to the White House, Arianna Evans strode to the heart of the crowd,
gripped a microphone and quieted the demonstrators.
Unlike on previous nights, they fell silent en masse, almost immediately.
Swinging her long violet braids over her shoulder, Evans, a 24year-old college student from Maryland, began by warning anyone who wanted to loot and cause destruction to go away.
This day of protests is and will remain peaceful, she vowed: “We will flush you out,” she told would-be troublemakers.
Then she handed the mic to Kenny Sway, a D.C. musician she’d met just hours before at another protest on Capitol Hill.
He asked the still-silent and docile crowd to sit crosslegged, raise their cellphones, turn on the flashlights and wave the devices in the air.
With the sun setting over his right shoulder, he launched into a rendition of “Lean on Me,” thousands of voices joining him on every chorus.
Evans sang along, too, thrilled it had all come together.
They hadn’t planned it, but after she and Sway fell into conversation at the Capitol Hill protest, he decided to follow her to the White House with his microphone and speakers.
At nightfall, the crowd began to thin.
Some drifted away, some marched to other parts of the city.
“We should all be concerned about who is giving the orders.” D.C. Mayor Muriel E. Bowser, on the many federal agencies on the streets
