Space station welcomes astronauts aboard
In another milestone and ahead of schedule, SpaceX capsule carrying NASA’s two-man crew docks safely with the orbiting outpost.
USA TODAY US Edition - 1 Jun 2020: 1A: Emre Kelly Florida Today USA TODAY NETWORK
BREVARD COUNTY, Fla. — Safely and ahead of schedule, astronauts Bob Behnken and Doug Hurley docked with the International Space Station on Sunday, a crucial milestone in
Their 27-foot Crew Dragon capsule, launched from Kennedy Space Center at 3:22 p.m. EDT Saturday, made contact with the orbiting outpost at 10:16 a.m. — a timeline just shy of the predicted 19hour trek.
Docking was completed 14 minutes later with “hard capture,” or an airtight seal between the ISS and Crew Dragon.
“It’s been a real honor to be a small part of this nine-year endeavor since a United States spaceship has docked with the International Space Station,” mission commander Hurley said.
“This is an incredible time to be at NASA.
Three new vehicles to be flown, continuing missions to low-Earth orbit, and then to the moon and Mars.”
Astronaut Chris Cassidy, already on board the ISS after launching on a Russian Soyuz spacecraft, welcomed the veteran astronauts by ringing a bell in the station’s Unity module.
The Navy tradition is used to welcome the arrival of new crew members.
“Crew of Expedition 63 is honored to welcome Dragon and the Commercial Crew Program aboard the International Space Station,” Cassidy said.
“Bob and Doug, glad to have you as part of the crew.
Well done.”
For Hurley, the docking is familiar.
In 2011, he was on the final space shuttle mission’s rendezvous with the ISS, during which his team left behind an American flag to be retrieved by the next group of astronauts launched from U.S. soil.
Now, nearly 10 years later, he’ll capture the flag he left behind.
The docking marks something of a halfway point for SpaceX.
After a oneto-four-month stay on the station,
Behnken and Hurley will reenter the capsule for departure and a splashdown in the Atlantic Ocean.
If successful, it will pave the way for SpaceX to continue flying astronauts for NASA and other agencies.
It has even secured interest from civilians like actor Tom Cruise for flights to low-Earth orbit.
Saturday’s liftoff from Pad 39A on a Falcon 9 rocket returned the U.S. to crewed spaceflight, which ended in July 2011 with the final flight of the space shuttle.
Under multibillion-dollar contracts doled out by NASA, SpaceX and Boeing were selected in 2014 to build new commercial spacecraft and return astronauts to the station.
With its docking, Crew Dragon became the fifth vehicle now attached to the ISS.
Also there are two Russian Progress cargo craft, a Russian Soyuz capsule and a Japanese HTV-9 cargo vehicle.
