10 things to evaluate with OTAs underway
Daily Southtown - 1 Jun 2020 - 1 - By Brad Biggs
With organized team activities underway and minicamp scheduled for June 22-24, valuable time on the field will be conducted in a virtual world, creating challenges for the Chicago Bears in their effort to rebound from last season’s disappointment.
Without footballs, helmets and the expansive grass fields at Halas Hall, the Bears are in the same boat as the other 31 NFL teams, doing their best to prepare for the day they can return to football activities.
It’s an unprecedented time, and the teams that find creative ways to break through with teaching points minus actual reps on the field will be ahead.
With that in mind, here are 10 things the Bears should have been looking for if they were on the field this month:
1.
The No.
1 storyline of the offseason, and perhaps the regular season, can’t be answered until a quarterback competition starts on the field.
Coach Matt Nagy needs to see how Nick Foles’ experience in similar systems carries over to what the Bears are doing.
He needs to evaluate where Mitch Trubisky is after a frustrating Year 3.
Can Trubisky show better pocket awareness?
Is he doing a better job of diagnosing defenses, something that shouldn’t be difficult when he’s going against the same unit every day?
It’s difficult to imagine Trubisky winning the job.
The Bears ranked near the bottom of the league in so many key offensive categories that adding an 11-year veteran and a rookie at tight end, swapping out the right guard and a small shuffle at wide receiver don’t seem like enough changes to promote genuine optimism.
But the Bears have billed this as a fullblown quarterback competition, the start of which is on hold.
2.
Time on the field is essential for new offensive line coach Juan Castillo.
He can go over the techniques he wants his linemen to use in virtual meetings for weeks and show them clips for hours, but he needs to get his hands on players and see them work
to start making an impact.
Can Germain Ifedi transition back to guard, where he played early in his career with the Seahawks, as the Bears expect?
If they are counting on big improvement from this group, it needs every day it can get on the field.
3.
The Bears traded up to draft running back David Montgomery in 2019, and the Year 1 results were certainly pedestrian: He averaged only 3.7 yards per carry.
A lot of factors with the running game need to be ironed out, and Montgomery needs to be better.
You’re not going to get full contact in the spring, but you can see if he is picking his hole and hitting it with more speed.
That was the progression last year.
He wasn’t a hesitant runner at the start, but he could have played faster and he showed flashes of that as the season went along.
Coaches need to determine if Montgomery plays faster when they put him on a downhill track with a road map of where he’s going.
That can be accomplished with more 12 and 13 personnel.
If Nagy sticks with more shotgun, the philosophy is the same.
Montgomery needs to be more decisive in the running game and more involved in the passing game after catching only 25 passes in 35 targets as a rookie.
4.
The questions at tight end start with newcomers Jimmy Graham and Cole Kmet.
The Bears need to see how they can use Graham in the passing game.
Can he still affect defenses as the backside X receiver in a 3-by-1 formation?
Does he still have enough juice to separate against a top-tier defender from the slot?
When they line him up as the Y tight end, what routes can they get out of him?
What is he most comfortable with?
All of the reps for the starting Y tight end should go to second-round pick Kmet.
It would be designed entirely around getting Kmet up to speed with the technique, blocking schemes and line calls.
Using him as a move tight end, an on-the-line tight end and a flex tight end and seeing how much he can handle mentally and how he stacks up speed-wise coming out of his breaks against NFL talent.
Coaches can see those things in OTAs.
If he’s struggling, the Bears are going to have to scheme for him a little more early in the season and get him more favorable matchups or open versus zone coverage.
Kmet ran a pro route tree at Notre Dame, and it meshes with what the Bears are going to ask him to do: running crossers and stick routes and catching the ball on inside seam routes off RPOs.
So he should be detailed in those routes.
5.
Recovery from another left shoulder surgery likely will limit Anthony Miller.
But the questions at wide receiver start with rookie fifth-round pick Darnell Mooney.
Mooney can run, but OTAs offer the first chance to see if he can be more than a vertical stretch guy during his rookie season.
Does he have some slot ability?
How does he match up against Kyle Fuller in one-on-ones?
He should catch the ball in 7-on-7 in OTAs because it is a free-for-all, but it means nothing.
Can he pick up the offense in team periods?
When the quarterback makes a check at the line of scrimmage, can he see it and execute?
Does he understand what safety rotation means in terms of how he runs routes?
First-round rookie receivers can struggle with these issues, and Mooney is a lateround pick.
But the No.
1 thing coaches want to see is how developed his route tree is.
Was he coached much at Tulane or was he just told to run past people?
Along those lines, does last
year’s fourth round-pick, Riley Ridley, look like a different player?
If he doesn’t, he could quickly become a draft pick who doesn’t pan out.
6.
Matt Nagy surely spent time this offseason developing a plan for running back Tarik Cohen because last season’s didn’t work.
Cohen suffered a precipitous drop in production, averaging only 3.3 yards per rush and 5.8 yards per reception.
What’s the plan for him in the running game, and how can he be better deployed as a receiver?
The Bears need a detailed vision for how he’s going to be used because he has too much athletic ability not to be a consistent matchup threat for opposing defenses.
Spring is the time to introduce that.
7.
It’s important the Bears get secondround pick Jaylon Johnson up to speed.
Missed reps hurt him and Cole Kmet as much or more than anyone.
The Bears probably wouldn’t put Johnson in front of Kevin Toliver or Artie Burns at cornerback on the first day of OTAs because he’s a rookie.
They might put Burns behind Fuller and let Toliver and Johnson compete on the right side.
If Burns started making plays, he could slide over to the other side and compete for that spot too.
Johnson needs reps — tons of reps — and missing them will hurt him.
He can’t be as grabby as he was in college and will not be able to take over players physically as he did at Utah.
He has a lot to learn.
He really needs to be beat in practice to learn — reps when he finds out what works and doesn’t.
Time missed is critical for Johnson because he’s not going to be able to line up in coverage at 8 yards and just dominate people.
Not as a rookie.
8.
What is Robert Quinn’s role besides rushing the passer?
How is coordinator Chuck Pagano going to fit him into the defense?
If you go up against the 49ers, what will Quinn do?
Does he just play the weak side?
What if they flip tight end George Kittle before the snap?
When the Bears run a zone blitz, is Quinn the one who always rushes, or can he drop in coverage?
How does he play in space?
The coaches can tinker with those things in OTAs, looking at the athlete on the field.
The Bears still can do that in training camp, but they will be behind.
And if they have an idea of what they want to do and two weeks in it’s not working, then a quick adjustment is necessary.
Quinn is going to help the pass rush, but it remains to be seen what he can do against the run and how he’1I fit in with what they want to do in coverage.
9.
The Bears have professed faith in Eddy Pineiro with the hope the young kicker makes a big leap early in his career.
The kicking carousel left town, but the team did sign Ramiz Ahmed to push Pineiro.
The key for Pineiro is using last season as a springboard to develop.
Kicking at Soldier Field has its natural difficulties, so mastering the ability to hit a ball that stays true in all conditions is an ongoing goal.
10.
Matt Nagy isn’t going to change his ways — nor should he — but missed in-person time with his players is significant because a football team is built in the offseason.
Maybe the Bears were guilty to a degree of trying to pick up last year where they left off in 2018.
They almost have to rebuild the culture after 2019, when they fell from the top of the
division to 8-8, with an injury to Lions quarterback Matthew Stafford maybe the only thing that kept them out of the NFC North basement.
They miss the brief interactions that can build a foundation, such as chatting up players in the weight room.
It helps that Nagy is entering his third season.
Teams with rookie or first-year coaches are going to be pressed when football starts again.
