WORKING TOGETHER
When the season paused, the Thunder had been playing at a high level.
What will it take to get back on track?
The NBA season will resume with 22 teams playing at Disney World.
That much has been known since Thursday, but even the July 31 start date is tentative.
While the league's Board of Governor sand the National Basketball Players Association have approved a season restart plan, Thunder
general manager Sam Presti emphasized Sunday that the finer details are still to be determined.
“We don't have any idea what this is going to be like,” Presti said on a conference call, “so we're going in with no preconceived notions other than we' re going to have to be adaptable, and we're going to have to get comfortable with the f act that things are not going to be the way we're used to them being.
Once you get past that, I think you can get into really embracing that kind of uncertainty.”
Embracing uncertainty might be the NBA's new motto until mid- October, when the season is finally slated to end 12 months after it began.
In late May, according to ESPN, all 30 of the league's general managers were polled about which return-to-play format they preferred.
A World Cup group-stage plan was on the table.
So was a return of all 30 teams.
Presti didn't divulge his preference Sunday.
“We were going to go with whatever was best for the league,” Presti said.
“We'll
play anywhere, so we' re perfectly happy with what the league chose to go with.
I think everyone has to be.
There's no choice.”
The NBA season has been suspended since March 11, when Rudy Go bert tested positive for C OVID -19 before a Thunder-Jazz game in Oklahoma City.
Jazz teammate Donovan Mitchell tested positive the next day.
Kevin Durant and Marcus Smart also contracted the virus.
A “bubble” environment
in Orlando will be designed to protect players and staff from the corona virus.
Florida' s Department of Health reported 1,180 new cases of COVID-19 on Sunday.
On Thursday, the state reported 1,413 new cases — its highest daily count since March.
“The chief concern for everybody has been and will continue to be the health and s afety of everybody t hat's going down there,” Presti said, “but our trust is placed in the NBA and the NBA's work with city and I guess county officials in Florida, and we're looking forward to it.”
NBA Commissioner Adam Silver said Thursday on TNT that older coaches might not be allowed on the bench in Orlando and that “they may have to retain social distancing protocols.”
Pelicans coach Alvin Gentry and Mavericks coach Rick Carlisle — both over 60 — pushed back on Silver's comments.
Presti was asked Sunday about Thunder assistant Maurice Cheeks, who is 63.
“We're still waiting for all of the different protocols to be presented to us in terms of who goes and who doesn't go,” Presti said.
The Athletic reported that each team's travel party might be limited to 35 people.
“We're going to be bringing a very limited amount of people there, but again, that doesn't bother us because everybody is coming with the same amount of people,” Presti said.
“We'll make it work.”
The Thunder (40-24) will play eight “seeding games” before the playoffs begin in midAugust.
Oklahoma City could finish anywhere from the No.
3 to No.
7 seed in the Western Conference.
Presti thought for a few seconds when asked about his emotional response to the NBA returning.
“We're certainly excited, but we also can't lose sight of the other issues that are taking place in the country just in general,” Presti said.
“The country has been through a lot the last few months, and I think we have to be sensitive to that as well, that this is a game, it's a sport, it's entertainment.
“What we've got to make sure of is that these other issues don't get ignored because there's something else to focus on.”
