City officials bicker over police reform
Marathon meeting exposes divisions in Dallas leadership on how to address the issue
Dallas’ top elected officials spent five hours Friday evening listening to public comments and another three hours grilling the city’s police chief and pitching broad ideas about reform — including divesting resources from the police department.
7 —
But as the night neared its conclusion, it began to resemble more of a reality TV show than a City Council meeting.
A heated line of questions from Mayor Eric Johnson to Police Chief U. Reneé Hall prompted the city manager and a council member to try to interject.
The mayor instead muted their mics, which angered council members enough to later yell over one another in the virtual meeting.
The first council meeting since widespread protests of police brutality against black communities offered views about scaling back money for the Dallas Police Department, but it also burst open drawnout tensions among the mayor, the city manager and council members.
“It’s not time for fingerpointing or disrespect or silencing,” said council member Jennifer Staubach Gates, who represents northwest Dallas.
“We have one Dallas, and I just ask that we try to come together and maybe never schedule another Friday night meeting that lasted eight hours.
This did not end well.”
The day started on the coattails ofa
police order.
Shortly before midnight Thursday, Hall implemented the “duty to intervene” policy, the first change announced by leaders to department orders since the May 25 death of a black
Minneapolis man, George Floyd, who died when a white police officer knelt on his neck for nearly nine minutes during an arrest.
Then early Friday afternoon, preceding the lengthy public comments from Dallas residents, City Manager T.C.
Broadnax sent an 11item memo that outlined short and longterm police reform items.
Lengthy meeting
More than 200 police reform advocates signed up to speak at Friday’s meeting, many waiting five hours for a minute of virtual public speaking.
Like in other parts of the country, they requested — and some demanded — scaling back police department funding.
Several council members supported that idea.
But it was an early line of questioning about mass arrests on Margaret Hunt Hill Bridge that sparked the fuse for latenight bickering.
Council members have grappled with calls to act on police brutality and ensure no more black lives are lost at the hands of Dallas police.
Speakers on Friday blasted DPD’s response to the peaceful demonstration on the bridge Monday night, when 674 protesters were arrested.
Hall announced Thursday that she would not charge the protesters.
But Johnson pressed Hall about the kinds of weapons the officers used that night and her response to the demonstrations.
Hall said she didn’t know whether her department used rubber bullets — a term the council used broadly — and is still reviewing video footage.
At one point, when Johnson peppered Hall repeatedly about the lack of police presence during looting in Deep Ellum, Broadnax tried to interrupt the mayor to come to his employee’s defense.
Hall reports to Broadnax.
The city manager said later that the line of questioning had been “different” from anything he’d seen from a mayor in his 25 years of local government.
Johnson told Broadnax that he was out of order, and that he has a right to ask questions.
When Johnson continued to get interrupted by Broadnax and council member Carolyn King Arnold, he called on staff to mute both their mics above Arnold’s cry of, “You can’t mute me!”
Arnold, a South Oak Cliff representative and staunch defender of the chief, criticized the mayor for muting her mic again and told him he’s silencing her constituents.
“When you mute me, you mute them,” Arnold said.
‘Tam the city manager’
The public spat between Johnson and Broadnax echoed earlier disagreements between them about the mayor’s insistence that Broadnax oversteps his bounds as city manager.
Johnson told Broadnax Friday night that just because he runs the city doesn’t mean he gets to lead the meetings.
“T am the city manager.
I run this city,” Broadnax told Johnson, adding that he consults with the mayor and the council and the 13,000 employees “that report directly to me,” including
Hall.
Broadnax is the highest paid city employee with a salary of more than $400,000.
“T think you are confusing running this city with running this meeting,” Johnson said.
Other council members appeared shocked and angry over the mayor’s decision to mute the city manager’s mic.
Adam Bazaldua said he was “embarrassed” — and when Johnson told him he was also out of order, he and Arnold yelled at him.
Deputy Mayor Pro Tem Adam McGough quelled the tensions and asked council members to “move this city forward.”
Broadnax said discussions got heated, “emotions are raw” and it had been a long week for council members.
He outlined Hall’s policy changes he had announced to the council late Thursday night.
That included public reports of all traffic stops and citations and implementation of a body and dashcam policy by June 30.
Broadnax said Hall will review the response on the bridge with her team and believed “what happened on the bridge was inappropriate.”
Hall said the department continues to learn and improve its practices, but “change doesn’t happen overnight.”
‘““We see where we could do things differently,” Hall said.
“That’s our goal, is to be better in the future.”
“This is only the beginning,” Broadnax said, nearing the end of the eighthour meeting.
“The real change happens when we start working together.”
