‘This is your history,’ Trump tells cadets
Call comes amid strains with military
The Dallas Morning News - 14 Jun 2020 - 1A - By DARLENE SUPERVILLE The Associated Press
President Donald Trump stresses tradition and unity in a commencement speech at the U.S. Military Academy in West Point, N.Y.
WEST POINT.
N.Y. — As the nation struggles to confront its complicated racial legacy, President Donald Trump preached unity to West Point graduates and told them never to forget the legacy of soldiers from generations ago who fought “a bloody war to extinguish the evil of slavery.”
His appeal to reconciliation and remembrance came at a time when his own relationship with the military is under strain, and the commander in chief and Pentagon leaders have faced unrelenting criticism over their response to the protests that overwhelmed the country after George Floyd’s death in Minneapolis.
Trump appeared to allude to those tensions as he addressed more than 1,100 graduates at an unusual outdoor ceremony held during a global pandemic.
“What has historically made America unique is the durability of its institutions against the passions and prejudices of the moment,” Trump said.
“When times are turbulent, when the road is rough, what matters most is that which is permanent, timeless, enduring and eternal.”
In the past two weeks, Trump has yelled at Defense Secretary Mark Esper for publicly opposing his call to deploy activeduty troops to quell the protests stemming from the killing of Floyd, who was black, by a white Minneapolis police officer.
Trump then shut down Esper’s attempt to begin a public debate on removing the names of Confederate army officers from military bases, an idea that is gaining momentum across the country.
Gen. Mark Milley, the Joint Chiefs of Staff chairman, risked Trump’s ire Thursday by declaring it had been “a mistake” for him to accompany him on a June 1 walk through Lafayette Square.
The trip ended with the president posing with a Bible outside St. John’s Church, which was damaged
by fire during the unrest.
Milley’s comments amounted to an extraordinary expression of regret by Trump’s chief military adviser, who said his appearance led to the perception of the military becoming embroiled in politics, which in his view — one shared by Esper — is a threat to democracy.
During the commencement ceremony, protesters sailed along the nearby Hudson River in kayaks and sailboats to denounce the president.
In his 22minute address, Trump thanked the newly commissioned officers for choosing to serve and reminded them of storied generals like Douglas McArthur and Dwight D. Eisenhower and the history of the West Point.
“It was on this soil that American patriots held the most vital fortress in our war for independence,” Trump said.
It was the U.S. Military Academy, he said, that “gave us the men and women who fought and won a bloody war to extinguish the evil of slavery within one lifetime of our founding.”
“This is your history.
This is the legacy that each of you inherits,” Trump continued, adding that it was bought with American blood spilled in battle.
“You must never forget it.”
Yet, Trump leaned into his “America first” brand of foreign policy without using the phrase, telling the cadets their job is “not to rebuild foreign nations, but to defend and defend strongly our nation from our foreign enemies.”
The president stressed the unity of a graduating class that came from across the country “from every race, religion, color and creed.” The class also includes citizens of 11 other countries, including BosniaHerzegovina, South Korea and Tanzania.
Esper did not attend, but echoed the theme of unity in a video message.
“T expect you to remain committed to our core values: loyalty, duty, respect, selfless service, honor, integrity and personal courage,” Esper said.
“These principles will guide you in challenging times and in the face of new and emerging threats.”
