Events planned to mark slayings
Virtual commemoration, service to remember Tulsa Race Massacre on Sunday
Tulsa World - 27 May 2020 - A1 - By Kevin Canfield
A virtual commemoration and a special service at Vernon A.M.E Church are among the events planned for Sunday to mark the two days 99 years ago when one of the nation's most thriving African American communities was destroyed in the 1921 Race Massacre.
The virtual commemoration begins at 2 p.m.
The event is being organized by the Tulsa Race Massacre Centennial Commission.
Participants will include Race Massacre Commission Chairman and state Sen. Kevin Matthews; Phil Armstrong, project
and the Animal Wellness Foundation, which led the investigation.
Chris Wilson, First Assistant U.S. Attorney in U.S. Attorney Brian Kuester's office, declined to comment on the request by the groups, saying the office has not had an opportunity to review and discuss the allegations.
Edmondson said investigations by Animal Wellness Action and the Animal Wellness Foundation identified three Oklahoma operators, claimed by the groups to be involved in illegal cockfighting activities.
The three operators were among 71 exporters across the U.S. whose shipping documents were obtained by the groups from the Guam Department of Agriculture.
Guam shipping records show that three of the top five U.S. exporters of fowl to Guam were located in the U.S. District for the Eastern District of Oklahoma.
The operators targeted by the AWA and AWF are located in Heavener, Stigler and Tahlequah.
The “overarching conclusion” from the review of some 2,500 public shipping records dating back to November 2016 was that Oklahoma was the No.
1 state in the U.S. in the shipping of fowl to Guam, said Wayne Pacelle, AWA founder.
President Donald Trump in December 2018 signed the Agriculture Improvement Act of 2018, which established a federal ban on all animal fighting in the U.S. territories, effective last December.
Oklahoma was one of the last states to outlaw cockfighting when voters in 2002 outlawed the practice.
Public documents examined by the AWA and AWF found that the three operators sent many shipments amounting to hundreds of birds to Guam that were claimed to be “brood fowl,” Edmondson said.
But the ratio of roosters to hens in the shipments were 10-to-1 or 100-to-1 in some instances, Edmondson said.
Roosters are used in cockfighting.
“That indicates that it is not brood stock at all,” Edmondson said.
“It is intended for the fighting rings of Guam” a violation of state and federal law.
Edmondson said the U.S. attorney, should he choose to investigate any violations of federal law linked to the allegations, would likely use U.S.
Postal Service investigators since the fowl were likely sent via regular mail.
Federal law specifically prohibits the use of USPS to promote, or in any other manner further, an animal fighting venture, Edmondson wrote in a letter to Keuster.
