SEEKING BOUNCE, REGION ROLLS OUT SLOGANS
Daily Press - 10 Jun 2020 - 1 - By Kimberly Pierceall and Stacy Parker Staff writers
It only took a pandemic for an unlikely, albeit fairly obvious, alliance to form.
Tourists, meet Norfolk-Virginia Beach.
The travel destination duo is hoping to appeal to would-be vacationers living within a tank of gas by launching a joint marketing campaign led with the slogan: “Together at Last.” Three simple words that, when combined, could be both a sigh of relief that the calls to self-quarantine are lifting and vacation awaits as well as a nod to a geographically fragmented region that hasn’t been known to be on the same page very often.
No matter what it is, it’s among the many efforts near and far that the travel industry will be making to jump-start tourism.
COVID-19 has kept people home and largely off of planes and out of hotels for at least the past three months as attractions and businesses remained closed per state orders to slow the spread of the virus.
At its lowest point, hotel revenue across Hampton Roads was off 80% year over year the week of April 19, but that was compared to a week that included the popular Something in the Water music festival last year, according to Old Dominion University’s Dragas Center for Economic Analysis and Policy looking at data from hospitality research firm STR.
Since then, hotel revenue in the region has slowly recovered and was down 57.8% the week of May 24 compared to the year before.
Hotel room revenue in Williamsburg in the last four weeks of the pandemic had dropped by 90% compared with a year ago, according to data from ODU.
“That’s what you call an economic disaster,” said Ron Kirkland, who represents the majority of hotels in Williamsburg as the leader of the Williamsburg Hotel & Motel Association.
“Frankly, it’s the same as if those hotels were closed down.”
Old Dominion University economists have said overall hotel revenue in Hampton Roads rose to $898 million in 2019, up from $877 million in 2018 and $839 million in 2017.
“Without tourism, your economy really takes a hit,” said Kurt Krause, president and CEO of VisitNorfolk, which teamed up with Virginia Beach for the “Together at Last” campaign.
Kirkland, for one, was encouraged to see Gold Rush Mini Golf at Go-Karts Plus in Williamsburg reopen in late May.
It’s not a theme park, but it was something.
And each new something that opens might mean one or two more people venturing to the area for a vacation, he said.
“It doesn’t matter if it’s Williamsburg, Norfolk or Virginia Beach, we need people to come and stay the night,” he said.
The messages to tourists, so far, vary by destination, but most are universally aiming to reassure travelers.
In the Outer Banks, for example, it’s the “Summer of Glove” with a riff on the Summer of Love and a logo featuring two medical gloved hands forming a heart shape in the center.
In Williamsburg, it will soon be “Life.
At Your Pace.”
“As recovery continues, we will all travel and socialize ‘at our own pace,’ and at our own comfort level,” said Victoria Cimino, CEO of the Williamsburg Tourism Council explaining her group’s new slogan and marketing campaign that will appear on nontraditional radio, television, online and social media advertising.
Individually, even, Virginia Beach has revived its “We’re Open” campaign that originally launched just before the threat of the pandemic took hold, to signal to visitors that the destination was welcoming and inclusive.
But the message took on an entirely new meaning thanks to the coronavirus.
Now that the beaches have been allowed to fully reopen, the ‘“‘We’re Open” signs are back up in business windows throughout the city.
It’s also airing television commercials using vintage footage of classic Virginia Beach experiences “to remind visitors that our beaches have always been and will always be there for them,” said Tiffany Russell, a spokeswoman for the city’s convention and visitors bureau.
Being flexible is a big part of the city’s recovery strategy, while also providing “a consistent, reassuring message of openness, safety and cleanliness, and fun,” Russell said.
In addition, both Virginia Beach and Outer Banks tourism agencies separately asked their travel businesses to pledge to keep people safe with operational changes.
The Williamsburg Tourism Council is also adding the ability for hoteliers and attractions to list the safety measures they’ve put in place, like social distancing or touchless operations on its VisitWilliamsburg.com site.
“Communicating new procedures aimed at safe travel will be one of Visit Williamsburg’s most important functions moving forward,” Cimino said.
Virginia Beach plans to spend about $10 million advertising the city to out-of-towners between March and September.
As for Norfolk and Virginia Beach’s joint effort, the two groups hope a visitor will pair trips to attractions in both cities, like the Virginia Aquarium at the Oceanfront and the Virginia Zoo in Norfolk, or the Virginia Contemporary Museum of Art at the beach or the Chrysler Museum near downtown Norfolk.
Two billboards in Richmond and one outside Washington will run the slogan.
A free online “At Last Pass” will offer deals to participating restaurants, businesses and activities.
“I just hope it works,” said Krause with Visit Norfolk.
“We have such a wonderful destination and people are trying to get out of their houses all over.”
Norfolk, individually, is also pushing its meeting and convention space as an alternative to businesses still wary of crowds.
“We're a city that’s not as busy, not as crowded,” Krause said.
Tom Van Benschoten is general manager of Rover Marine Inc., which operates American Rover and the Victory Cruiser off Town Point Park in Norfolk, and leads the VisitNorfolk board.
He has been a big fan of the regional slogan.
“From a tourism standpoint, we truly are a region,” he said.
The invisible barriers people see locally are entirely unseen by tourists.
“Tt’s a powerful message.
And I think it’s great that both Norfolk and Virginia Beach are being proactive about it,” he said.
“You can’t just hide.
We have a future ahead of us.”
He reopened for boat cruises on May 23, limiting access to only the deck and at half the capacity, after losing his typically busy spring business.
“T think people are going to be looking for things to do,” he said, as well as looking for a place that might be less crowded than a New York or an Orlando.
In Williamsburg, the area’s hotels are largely dependent on the Busch Gardens theme park and Colonial Williamsburg.
The latter has planned to reopen several of its historic interpretation sites on a limited basis beginning June 14, but visitors have been warned that interaction with the attraction’s actors will be scaled back for social distance, among other changes.
It’s not clear when Busch Gardens intends to reopen.
Universal Studios Orlando was perhaps the first large theme park to reopen to visitors last weekend.
“If we can get things opened up, particularly our attractions,” Kirkland said, “people are going to want to go and relax and put things out of their minds for a bit.”
“We need to be open by July 1,” he said of attractions being able to open with at least 50% capacity.
“We have a limited amount of time and then it drops off a cliff in September,” he said, noting that that’s when school traditionally starts back up.
“We need the marketing plans to work, we need the attractions to be able to open, we need measures in place to make people feel comfortable.”
