“TUNNEL VISION’ AMID TRAGEDY
Mass shooting milestone amid pandemic presents community with daunting psychological test
Daily Press - 29 May 2020 - 1 - By Joanne Kimberlin Staff writer
On the nation’s list of deadliest mass shootings, 22 communities have suffered at least as many deaths.
But on Sunday, May 31, Virginia Beach become the first on that terrible roll to reach a oneyear benchmark during the pandemic — a new crisis to dominate our thoughts and fears.
Has it really been a year since Hampton Roads’ darkest day, when 12 people were killed and four wounded in a workplace rampage at the municipal center?
In the aftermath, we were consumed.
Wracked with sorrow, shock, fear.
That it happened.
That it happened here.
That it could happen again.
We wept as one — for the dead, the injured, their families and the traumatized, who’ve turned each page of the calendar since with heavy hands.
Painful as it is, the one-year mark is an important milestone.
It’s a passage toward healing and a time for reflection and remembrance.
In stricken communities like ours, solemn ceremonies are normally center stage.
But the coronavirus has not only curtailed in-person events, it has sucked the oxygen from the room.
Heads and headlines are occupied with little else.
Who could have imagined something like this, a mushroom cloud so big it could overwhelm even our memorials?
At times like these, our focus shifts for the survival of our species, says one expert.
Humans can carry only so much worry, or zero in on only so many threats.
“It’s an evolutionary response to protect us,” said Arash Javanbakht, director of the Stress, Trauma and
Anxiety Research Clinic at Michigan’s Wayne State University.
“Tf there’s a lion on top of the mountain,” he said, “but there’s snake in the road right in front of us, we get tunnel vision on the snake — the most immediate danger.
6.
18.
‘TUNNEL VISION’ AMID TRAGEDY
avirus is that snake.”
Mass shootings and pandemics do have things common.
Both make us feel helpless, vul
nerable to a menace we often can’t see coming.
No clear motive has been found for the senseless violence at the municipal center, despite multiple investigations.
Like coronavirus, it can strike anyone, anytime, anywhere.
But one does seem to be impacting the other.
In 2019, there were more mass shootings in the U.S. than days in the year — 417, according to the Gun Violence Archive, a nonprofit organization tracking incidents that claim four or more victims.
Last month, with schools, businesses and churches mostly closed, mass shootings fell 24% when compared to the same month of 2019, according to a Bloomberg News analysis.
The numbing pace could easily resume when lockdowns end, but for now, it’s another reason for our distraction.
“Over the past few months, 100,000 Americans have died — death that’s happening right now,” Javanbakht said.
“No mass shooting has ever done that.
Or even 9/11.
So those other things become more distant concepts while this threat is the one triggering our emotions.” Javanbakht explores, among other things, the ripple effect of crises on society.
Eons ago, he says, humans learned to fear as a group.
Even a picture of a scared-looking face will make the amygdala, the fright area of our brains, light up during imaging studies.
That primitive trait can be exploited.
Javanbakht isn’t a fan of 24/7 “over-dramatized” cable news.
But the characteristic can also help unify.
“When we’re scared or stressed or touched, we can be more altruistic,” he said.
“Even people with grudges or different views can manage to support each other.”
In Virginia Beach, the crime scene tape and barricades that surrounded Building 2 for months after the shooting have been removed.
Now, it looks like the rest of the municipal center.
Red brick.
Cream-colored trim.
Except Building 2 is abandoned.
Silent.
Roughly 400 city employees in four departments used to work inside, a hum that’s been replaced with stillness.
Some wanted the structure destroyed — erased.
Instead, the city plans to eventually transform it into a police headquarters.
In the meantime, empty windows stare out, row upon row of blank eyes.
It feels like hallowed ground.
Nothing in this story will bring comfort to the inner circle of those lost and harmed there.
It will take much longer — if ever — before a single day can pass without them thinking about what happened.
For the rest of the community, the one-year mark is an assessment point for the good of the whole.
What did we miss?
What could have prevented this?
What have we done since that might stop the next one?
Confronting such questions in the teeth of a pandemic can make life seem like it’s never been riskier.
“And that’s simply not true — at least not in general,” Javanbakht said.
“The world has endured much more terrible situations in the past.
Mass killings, murder, rape by other tribes and countries.
Tens of millions dead in pandemics where we truly were helpless.
“Compared to what humanity has been through, we are at our best time now.” Still, dangers will always persist “and the human species remains a violent group of animals,” he said.
“So even though we’re among the safest in the history of mankind, we will never be totally
We can only shoulder the troubles we can, when we can.
The fact that we’re red-lined right now with other worries does not mean we have forgot
