HAMPTON VA TO BRING BACK ON-SITE VISITS FOR SOME SERVICES
Facility, 3 outpatient clinics, expects June 10 start
Daily Press - 2 Jun 2020 - 1 - By Lisa Vernon Sparks Staff writer
HAMPTON — Next week, Hampton VA Medical Center plans to bring back on-site health care services that had been stopped to slow the spread of COVID-19.
The facility, along with three outpatient clinics in Virginia Beach, Chesapeake and Elizabeth City, expects to offer some in-person visits beginning June 10.
Between the four sites, as many as 58,000 veterans living in the region have access to the clinics.
Some face-to-face services previously canceled — elective surgeries and other periodic check-ups that are considered more urgent than a routine follow-up — will be back on the calendar.
“The goal is to get up to 20%,” Hampton VA director David C. Collins said.
Virginia is well into its Phase 1 reopening — with retail, churches and restaurants operating at 50% capacity and beaches now fully accessible to the general public.
Virginians also are required to wear masks inside public places.
While VA hospitals follow federal guidelines, Collin said hospital officials still use the number of new COVID-19 cases in Virginia as a barometer — and plan to proceed with caution in considering how it offers health care during the pandemic.
“The safety of veterans and staff is the highest priority.
We don’t ... want to get too far ahead of ourselves and have to scale back,” Collins said.
“That’s really critical now.
We are seeing a little bit of an increase across Virginia.
Our populations are ... affected by those increases.
We really want to make sure we are safeguarding their health and not exposing them unnecessarily.”
As of Monday, the number of new coronavirus cases fell below 1,000, and the number of people hospitalized was also down, according to the Virginia Department of Health.
The trend over the past few weeks had been reversed.
“We are going to keep an eye on that,” Collins added.
The facility said it would continue with personalized virtual care options, such as the VA Video Connect, telehealth, phone consults and wellness checks.
Staff and veteran COVID-19 screening, physical distancing and appropriate personal protective equipment and frequent disinfection of high-touch surfaces also remain in place at all facilities.
Patients are recommended to contact their providers about expanded services before arriving on site.
As additional facilities reintroduce services, the medical center said it would share best practices learned with all facilities across the country.
