‘VIRGINIA HAS NEVER BEEN WILLING TO DEAL WITH SYMBOLS.
UNTIL NOW.’
In a victory for civil rights activists, Northam says he’s taking steps to remove Lee monument in Richmond
Daily Press - 5 Jun 2020 - 1 - By Marie Albiges Staff writer
Gov.
Ralph Northam announced Thursday he was taking steps to remove the Richmond statue of Confederate Gen. Robert E. Lee following several days of unrest and protests in the city and across Virginia.
The statue, which stands along Richmond’s popular Monument Avenue with four other Confederate statues, is owned by the state.
Northam said it will be placed in storage until officials can find another place for it, and the community will help decide where to put it.
“It’s time to acknowledge the reality of institutional racism even if you can’t see it,” said Northam, a Democrat.
“Virginia has never been willing to deal with symbols.
Until now.” The move, celebrated by civil rights activists who say it’s long overdue, comes after six days of
protesters calling for change following the death of George Floyd, who was captured on video saying “I cannot breathe” as a white Minneapolis police officer knelt on his neck for nearly nine minutes.
Northam’s announcement was made a few hours before a scheduled memorial service for Floyd.
Local African American activists, pastors and elected officials stood beside Northam as he made the announcement Tuesday.
Northam said the statue would be removed with the help of the Department of General Services “as soon as possible.”
“Make no mistake, removing a symbol is important, but it’s only a step.
It doesn’t mean problems are solved.
There are still monuments of inequities that exist in our commonwealth and in our country,” Northam said.
The governor said his authority to take down the statue comes from a state code section, 2.2-2402, which allows him to remove an “existing work of art” or structure owned by the commonwealth if he submits a plan to do so.
The 23-member Virginia Legislative Black Caucus said in a statement Thursday the statue’s removal was a step in the right direction.
“It’s disappointing it took so long,” said caucus chairman Del.
Lamont Bagby, D- Henrico.
“The Lee statue was a constant reminder to black Virginians of racism, dehumanization and hate that exists and was prevalent throughout our history.
As we continue to tear down symbols of hate, let us now build up institutions and systems of justice and equity.”
The Associated Press reported Thursday that Richmond Mayor Levar Stoney also announced plans to seek the removal of the other Confederate monuments along Monument Avenue.
Local governments in Virginia — including Norfolk City Council — can decide what to do with their Confederate statues beginning July 1.
The General Assembly voted this February to allow localities to move them after holding a public hearing.
The conversation on what to do with Confederate monuments was heightened in 2017, when a decision by the Charlottesville City Council to remove the Robert E. Lee statue sparked violent protests that brought neo-Nazis and white supremacists to the city.
During that same General Assembly session, lawmakers voted along party lines to create a commission that would recommend whether to take down the Robert E. Lee statue housed in the U.S. Capitol’s statuary hall and gifted by Virginia in 1909.
A state can ask Congress to replace any statue it has gifted in the National Statuary Hall Collection at the U.S. Capitol.
Monuments have been a target of activists seeking their removal over the past few days.
In Norfolk, the structure honoring the Confederate war dead has been tagged with “Black Lives Matter” graffiti messages and anti-police slogans as protests over police brutality have continued.
Republicans — who in November lost their majority in the General Assembly — have largely opposed the removal of Confederate statues.
On Thursday, the Republican Party of Virginia in a statement called Northam and Stoney’s announcements a “distraction” from their “derelict leadership” in handling the coronavirus pandemic and the protests.
“The governor’s decision to remove the Lee statue from Monument Avenue is not in the best interests of Virginia,” Senate Republicans said in a statement.
“Attempts to eradicate instead of contextualizing history invariably fail.”
The senators said the governor’s motivations were “suspect”, referring to the events of February 2019, when a photo surfaced of the governor’s medical school yearbook page on which there was a picture of someone in blackface and someone in Ku Klux Klan robes.
Northam first admitted he was in the photo, then retracted and apologized, saying he would focus the remainder of his term on addressing racial inequities.
