NOT WORTH THE RISK
After Portsmouth injury, Northam urges protesters to let governments handle removal of Confederate structures
Daily Press - 12 Jun 2020 - 1 - By Marie Albiges Staff writer
At least three Confederate statues have been taken down by protesters in Virginia since demonstrations began in late May, and with at least one person getting severely injured in the process, Gov.
Ralph Northam urged protesters to be safe and let the local governments handle the monuments’ removal instead.
someone’s life,” Northam said at a press conference in Richmond.
On Wednesday night in Portsmouth, protesters began by throwing paint and tagging graffiti onto the statue honoring the Confederate dead.
Gradually, they began beheading the four figures, hitting them with tools and removing a rifle and sword from their arms.
One of the figures was pulled down using a tow rope and fell onto Chris Green, who was standing underneath it.
Green was taken to the hospital, where he is being treated for lifethreatening injuries, according to the Virginia State Police.
Also on Wednesday, protesters in Richmond took down the statue of Jefferson Davis, the president of the Confederacy, on Monument Avenue, the Washington Post reported.
The statue was towed away by a truck a little before midnight.
Two other statues in Richmond were also recently pulled down by protesters: One honoring Confederate Gen.
Williams Carter Wickham in Monroe Park, and one depicting Christopher Columbus in Byrd Park, according to the Richmond Times-Dispatch.
“We all came together to create a process to (move the monuments) safely,” Northam said, referring to the state law that takes effect July 1 allowing local governing bodies to decide what to do with war monuments that sit on public property.
Localities must either hold a public
hearing or a referendum before removing their monuments.
“Let’s do this the right way and keep all Virginians safe,” Northam added.
Supporters of the statues say they are an important part of history and taking them down is offensive to those who fought in the Civil War, but opponents argue they are a symbol of oppression and a glorification of those who fought for the continued enslavement of African Americans.
After Northam announced he would be taking down the Robert E. Lee statue on Monument Avenue, a Richmond judge filed a temporary injunction against the removal.
Attorney General Mark Herring said Wednesday he would defend the governor’s decision to remove the statue.
“The statue does not seek to explain or seek reconciliation for that time: it seeks to glorify it,” Herring wrote in a notice to the courts.
In a tweet earlier Thursday,
Richmond Mayor Levar Stoney similarly urged the public to let the localities handle the monuments.
Stoney said last week he would remove four Confederate statues on Monument Avenue.
“For the sake of public safety, I ask the community to allow us to legally contract to have the remaining ones removed professionally, to prevent any potential harm that could result from attempts to remove them without professional experience,” he said.
